---
book: Designing Data-Intensive Applications
author: Martin Kleppmann
source: local PDF, converted with markitdown
section: ch09
---

CHAPTER 9
Consistency and Consensus
Is it better to be alive and wrong or right and dead?
—Jay Kreps, A Few Notes on Kafka and Jepsen (2013)
Lots of things can go wrong in distributed systems, as discussed in Chapter 8. The
simplest way of handling such faults is to simply let the entire service fail, and show
the user an error message. If that solution is unacceptable, we need to find ways of
tolerating faults—that is, of keeping the service functioning correctly, even if some
internal component is faulty.
In this chapter, we will talk about some examples of algorithms and protocols for
building fault-tolerant distributed systems. We will assume that all the problems
from Chapter 8 can occur: packets can be lost, reordered, duplicated, or arbitrarily
delayed in the network; clocks are approximate at best; and nodes can pause (e.g., due
to garbage collection) or crash at any time.
The best way of building fault-tolerant systems is to find some general-purpose
abstractions with useful guarantees, implement them once, and then let applications
rely on those guarantees. This is the same approach as we used with transactions in
Chapter 7: by using a transaction, the application can pretend that there are no
crashes (atomicity), that nobody else is concurrently accessing the database (isola‐
tion), and that storage devices are perfectly reliable (durability). Even though crashes,
race conditions, and disk failures do occur, the transaction abstraction hides those
problems so that the application doesn’t need to worry about them.
We will now continue along the same lines, and seek abstractions that can allow an
application to ignore some of the problems with distributed systems. For example,
one of the most important abstractions for distributed systems is consensus: that is,
getting all of the nodes to agree on something. As we shall see in this chapter, reliably
321

reaching consensus in spite of network faults and process failures is a surprisingly
tricky problem.
Once you have an implementation of consensus, applications can use it for various
purposes. For example, say you have a database with single-leader replication. If the
leader dies and you need to fail over to another node, the remaining database nodes
can use consensus to elect a new leader. As discussed in “Handling Node Outages” on
page 156, it’s important that there is only one leader, and that all nodes agree who the
leader is. If two nodes both believe that they are the leader, that situation is called split
brain, and it often leads to data loss. Correct implementations of consensus help
avoid such problems.
Later in this chapter, in “Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352, we
will look into algorithms to solve consensus and related problems. But first we first
need to explore the range of guarantees and abstractions that can be provided in a
distributed system.
We need to understand the scope of what can and cannot be done: in some situa‐
tions, it’s possible for the system to tolerate faults and continue working; in other sit‐
uations, that is not possible. The limits of what is and isn’t possible have been
explored in depth, both in theoretical proofs and in practical implementations. We
will get an overview of those fundamental limits in this chapter.
Researchers in the field of distributed systems have been studying these topics for
decades, so there is a lot of material—we’ll only be able to scratch the surface. In this
book we don’t have space to go into details of the formal models and proofs, so we
will stick with informal intuitions. The literature references offer plenty of additional
depth if you’re interested.
Consistency Guarantees
In “Problems with Replication Lag” on page 161 we looked at some timing issues that
occur in a replicated database. If you look at two database nodes at the same moment
in time, you’re likely to see different data on the two nodes, because write requests
arrive on different nodes at different times. These inconsistencies occur no matter
what replication method the database uses (single-leader, multi-leader, or leaderless
replication).
Most replicated databases provide at least eventual consistency, which means that if
you stop writing to the database and wait for some unspecified length of time, then
eventually all read requests will return the same value [1]. In other words, the incon‐
sistency is temporary, and it eventually resolves itself (assuming that any faults in the
network are also eventually repaired). A better name for eventual consistency may be
convergence, as we expect all replicas to eventually converge to the same value [2].
322 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

However, this is a very weak guarantee—it doesn’t say anything about when the repli‐
cas will converge. Until the time of convergence, reads could return anything or
nothing [1]. For example, if you write a value and then immediately read it again,
there is no guarantee that you will see the value you just wrote, because the read may
be routed to a different replica (see “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162).
Eventual consistency is hard for application developers because it is so different from
the behavior of variables in a normal single-threaded program. If you assign a value
to a variable and then read it shortly afterward, you don’t expect to read back the old
value, or for the read to fail. A database looks superficially like a variable that you can
read and write, but in fact it has much more complicated semantics [3].
When working with a database that provides only weak guarantees, you need to be
constantly aware of its limitations and not accidentally assume too much. Bugs are
often subtle and hard to find by testing, because the application may work well most
of the time. The edge cases of eventual consistency only become apparent when there
is a fault in the system (e.g., a network interruption) or at high concurrency.
In this chapter we will explore stronger consistency models that data systems may
choose to provide. They don’t come for free: systems with stronger guarantees may
have worse performance or be less fault-tolerant than systems with weaker guaran‐
tees. Nevertheless, stronger guarantees can be appealing because they are easier to use
correctly. Once you have seen a few different consistency models, you’ll be in a better
position to decide which one best fits your needs.
There is some similarity between distributed consistency models and the hierarchy of
transaction isolation levels we discussed previously [4, 5] (see “Weak Isolation Lev‐
els” on page 233). But while there is some overlap, they are mostly independent con‐
cerns: transaction isolation is primarily about avoiding race conditions due to
concurrently executing transactions, whereas distributed consistency is mostly about
coordinating the state of replicas in the face of delays and faults.
This chapter covers a broad range of topics, but as we shall see, these areas are in fact
deeply linked:
• We will start by looking at one of the strongest consistency models in common
use, linearizability, and examine its pros and cons.
• We’ll then examine the issue of ordering events in a distributed system (“Order‐
ing Guarantees” on page 339), particularly around causality and total ordering.
• In the third section (“Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352) we
will explore how to atomically commit a distributed transaction, which will
finally lead us toward solutions for the consensus problem.
Consistency Guarantees | 323

Linearizability
In an eventually consistent database, if you ask two different replicas the same ques‐
tion at the same time, you may get two different answers. That’s confusing. Wouldn’t
it be a lot simpler if the database could give the illusion that there is only one replica
(i.e., only one copy of the data)? Then every client would have the same view of the
data, and you wouldn’t have to worry about replication lag.
This is the idea behind linearizability [6] (also known as atomic consistency [7], strong
consistency, immediate consistency, or external consistency [8]). The exact definition
of linearizability is quite subtle, and we will explore it in the rest of this section. But
the basic idea is to make a system appear as if there were only one copy of the data,
and all operations on it are atomic. With this guarantee, even though there may be
multiple replicas in reality, the application does not need to worry about them.
In a linearizable system, as soon as one client successfully completes a write, all cli‐
ents reading from the database must be able to see the value just written. Maintaining
the illusion of a single copy of the data means guaranteeing that the value read is the
most recent, up-to-date value, and doesn’t come from a stale cache or replica. In
other words, linearizability is a recency guarantee. To clarify this idea, let’s look at an
example of a system that is not linearizable.
Figure 9-1. This system is not linearizable, causing football fans to be confused.
324 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Figure 9-1 shows an example of a nonlinearizable sports website [9]. Alice and Bob
are sitting in the same room, both checking their phones to see the outcome of the
2014 FIFA World Cup final. Just after the final score is announced, Alice refreshes
the page, sees the winner announced, and excitedly tells Bob about it. Bob incredu‐
lously hits reload on his own phone, but his request goes to a database replica that is
lagging, and so his phone shows that the game is still ongoing.
If Alice and Bob had hit reload at the same time, it would have been less surprising if
they had gotten two different query results, because they wouldn’t know at exactly
what time their respective requests were processed by the server. However, Bob
knows that he hit the reload button (initiated his query) after he heard Alice exclaim
the final score, and therefore he expects his query result to be at least as recent as
Alice’s. The fact that his query returned a stale result is a violation of linearizability.
What Makes a System Linearizable?
The basic idea behind linearizability is simple: to make a system appear as if there is
only a single copy of the data. However, nailing down precisely what that means
actually requires some care. In order to understand linearizability better, let’s look at
some more examples.
Figure 9-2 shows three clients concurrently reading and writing the same key x in a
linearizable database. In the distributed systems literature, x is called a register—in
practice, it could be one key in a key-value store, one row in a relational database, or
one document in a document database, for example.
Figure 9-2. If a read request is concurrent with a write request, it may return either the
old or the new value.
For simplicity, Figure 9-2 shows only the requests from the clients’ point of view, not
the internals of the database. Each bar is a request made by a client, where the start of
a bar is the time when the request was sent, and the end of a bar is when the response
was received by the client. Due to variable network delays, a client doesn’t know
Linearizability | 325

exactly when the database processed its request—it only knows that it must have hap‐
pened sometime between the client sending the request and receiving the response.i
In this example, the register has two types of operations:
• read(x) ⇒ v means the client requested to read the value of register x, and the
database returned the value v.
• write(x, v) ⇒ r means the client requested to set the register x to value v, and the
database returned response r (which could be ok or error).
In Figure 9-2, the value of x is initially 0, and client C performs a write request to set
it to 1. While this is happening, clients A and B are repeatedly polling the database to
read the latest value. What are the possible responses that A and B might get for their
read requests?
• The first read operation by client A completes before the write begins, so it must
definitely return the old value 0.
• The last read by client A begins after the write has completed, so it must defi‐
nitely return the new value 1 if the database is linearizable: we know that the
write must have been processed sometime between the start and end of the write
operation, and the read must have been processed sometime between the start
and end of the read operation. If the read started after the write ended, then the
read must have been processed after the write, and therefore it must see the new
value that was written.
• Any read operations that overlap in time with the write operation might return
either 0 or 1, because we don’t know whether or not the write has taken effect at
the time when the read operation is processed. These operations are concurrent
with the write.
However, that is not yet sufficient to fully describe linearizability: if reads that are
concurrent with a write can return either the old or the new value, then readers could
see a value flip back and forth between the old and the new value several times while
a write is going on. That is not what we expect of a system that emulates a “single
copy of the data.”ii
i. A subtle detail of this diagram is that it assumes the existence of a global clock, represented by the horizon‐
tal axis. Even though real systems typically don’t have accurate clocks (see “Unreliable Clocks” on page 287),
this assumption is okay: for the purposes of analyzing a distributed algorithm, we may pretend that an accu‐
rate global clock exists, as long as the algorithm doesn’t have access to it [47]. Instead, the algorithm can only
see a mangled approximation of real time, as produced by a quartz oscillator and NTP.
ii. A register in which reads may return either the old or the new value if they are concurrent with a write is
known as a regular register [7, 25].
326 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

To make the system linearizable, we need to add another constraint, illustrated in
Figure 9-3.
Figure 9-3. After any one read has returned the new value, all following reads (on the
same or other clients) must also return the new value.
In a linearizable system we imagine that there must be some point in time (between
the start and end of the write operation) at which the value of x atomically flips from
0 to 1. Thus, if one client’s read returns the new value 1, all subsequent reads must
also return the new value, even if the write operation has not yet completed.
This timing dependency is illustrated with an arrow in Figure 9-3. Client A is the first
to read the new value, 1. Just after A’s read returns, B begins a new read. Since B’s
read occurs strictly after A’s read, it must also return 1, even though the write by C is
still ongoing. (It’s the same situation as with Alice and Bob in Figure 9-1: after Alice
has read the new value, Bob also expects to read the new value.)
We can further refine this timing diagram to visualize each operation taking effect
atomically at some point in time. A more complex example is shown in Figure 9-4
[10].
In Figure 9-4 we add a third type of operation besides read and write:
• cas(x, v , v ) ⇒ r means the client requested an atomic compare-and-set oper‐
old new
ation (see “Compare-and-set” on page 245). If the current value of the register x
equals v , it should be atomically set to v . If x ≠ v then the operation should
old new old
leave the register unchanged and return an error. r is the database’s response (ok
or error).
Each operation in Figure 9-4 is marked with a vertical line (inside the bar for each
operation) at the time when we think the operation was executed. Those markers are
joined up in a sequential order, and the result must be a valid sequence of reads and
writes for a register (every read must return the value set by the most recent write).
The requirement of linearizability is that the lines joining up the operation markers
always move forward in time (from left to right), never backward. This requirement
Linearizability | 327

ensures the recency guarantee we discussed earlier: once a new value has been written
or read, all subsequent reads see the value that was written, until it is overwritten
again.
Figure 9-4. Visualizing the points in time at which the reads and writes appear to have
taken effect. The final read by B is not linearizable.
There are a few interesting details to point out in Figure 9-4:
• First client B sent a request to read x, then client D sent a request to set x to 0,
and then client A sent a request to set x to 1. Nevertheless, the value returned to
B’s read is 1 (the value written by A). This is okay: it means that the database first
processed D’s write, then A’s write, and finally B’s read. Although this is not the
order in which the requests were sent, it’s an acceptable order, because the three
requests are concurrent. Perhaps B’s read request was slightly delayed in the net‐
work, so it only reached the database after the two writes.
• Client B’s read returned 1 before client A received its response from the database,
saying that the write of the value 1 was successful. This is also okay: it doesn’t
mean the value was read before it was written, it just means the ok response from
the database to client A was slightly delayed in the network.
• This model doesn’t assume any transaction isolation: another client may change
a value at any time. For example, C first reads 1 and then reads 2, because the
value was changed by B between the two reads. An atomic compare-and-set (cas)
operation can be used to check the value hasn’t been concurrently changed by
another client: B and C’s cas requests succeed, but D’s cas request fails (by the
time the database processes it, the value of x is no longer 0).
• The final read by client B (in a shaded bar) is not linearizable. The operation is
concurrent with C’s cas write, which updates x from 2 to 4. In the absence of
328 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

other requests, it would be okay for B’s read to return 2. However, client A has
already read the new value 4 before B’s read started, so B is not allowed to read
an older value than A. Again, it’s the same situation as with Alice and Bob in
Figure 9-1.
That is the intuition behind linearizability; the formal definition [6] describes it more
precisely. It is possible (though computationally expensive) to test whether a system’s
behavior is linearizable by recording the timings of all requests and responses, and
checking whether they can be arranged into a valid sequential order [11].
Linearizability Versus Serializability
Linearizability is easily confused with serializability (see “Serializability” on page 251),
as both words seem to mean something like “can be arranged in a sequential order.”
However, they are two quite different guarantees, and it is important to distinguish
between them:
Serializability
Serializability is an isolation property of transactions, where every transaction
may read and write multiple objects (rows, documents, records)—see “Single-
Object and Multi-Object Operations” on page 228. It guarantees that transac‐
tions behave the same as if they had executed in some serial order (each
transaction running to completion before the next transaction starts). It is okay
for that serial order to be different from the order in which transactions were
actually run [12].
Linearizability
Linearizability is a recency guarantee on reads and writes of a register (an indi‐
vidual object). It doesn’t group operations together into transactions, so it does
not prevent problems such as write skew (see “Write Skew and Phantoms” on
page 246), unless you take additional measures such as materializing conflicts
(see “Materializing conflicts” on page 251).
A database may provide both serializability and linearizability, and this combination
is known as strict serializability or strong one-copy serializability (strong-1SR) [4, 13].
Implementations of serializability based on two-phase locking (see “Two-Phase Lock‐
ing (2PL)” on page 257) or actual serial execution (see “Actual Serial Execution” on
page 252) are typically linearizable.
However, serializable snapshot isolation (see “Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)”
on page 261) is not linearizable: by design, it makes reads from a consistent snapshot,
to avoid lock contention between readers and writers. The whole point of a consistent
snapshot is that it does not include writes that are more recent than the snapshot, and
thus reads from the snapshot are not linearizable.
Linearizability | 329

Relying on Linearizability
In what circumstances is linearizability useful? Viewing the final score of a sporting
match is perhaps a frivolous example: a result that is outdated by a few seconds is
unlikely to cause any real harm in this situation. However, there a few areas in which
linearizability is an important requirement for making a system work correctly.
Locking and leader election
A system that uses single-leader replication needs to ensure that there is indeed only
one leader, not several (split brain). One way of electing a leader is to use a lock: every
node that starts up tries to acquire the lock, and the one that succeeds becomes the
leader [14]. No matter how this lock is implemented, it must be linearizable: all nodes
must agree which node owns the lock; otherwise it is useless.
Coordination services like Apache ZooKeeper [15] and etcd [16] are often used to
implement distributed locks and leader election. They use consensus algorithms to
implement linearizable operations in a fault-tolerant way (we discuss such algorithms
later in this chapter, in “Fault-Tolerant Consensus” on page 364).iii There are still
many subtle details to implementing locks and leader election correctly (see for
example the fencing issue in “The leader and the lock” on page 301), and libraries like
Apache Curator [17] help by providing higher-level recipes on top of ZooKeeper.
However, a linearizable storage service is the basic foundation for these coordination
tasks.
Distributed locking is also used at a much more granular level in some distributed
databases, such as Oracle Real Application Clusters (RAC) [18]. RAC uses a lock per
disk page, with multiple nodes sharing access to the same disk storage system. Since
these linearizable locks are on the critical path of transaction execution, RAC deploy‐
ments usually have a dedicated cluster interconnect network for communication
between database nodes.
Constraints and uniqueness guarantees
Uniqueness constraints are common in databases: for example, a username or email
address must uniquely identify one user, and in a file storage service there cannot be
two files with the same path and filename. If you want to enforce this constraint as
the data is written (such that if two people try to concurrently create a user or a file
with the same name, one of them will be returned an error), you need linearizability.
iii. Strictly speaking, ZooKeeper and etcd provide linearizable writes, but reads may be stale, since by default
they can be served by any one of the replicas. You can optionally request a linearizable read: etcd calls this a
quorum read [16], and in ZooKeeper you need to call sync() before the read [15]; see “Implementing linear‐
izable storage using total order broadcast” on page 350.
330 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

This situation is actually similar to a lock: when a user registers for your service, you
can think of them acquiring a “lock” on their chosen username. The operation is also
very similar to an atomic compare-and-set, setting the username to the ID of the user
who claimed it, provided that the username is not already taken.
Similar issues arise if you want to ensure that a bank account balance never goes neg‐
ative, or that you don’t sell more items than you have in stock in the warehouse, or
that two people don’t concurrently book the same seat on a flight or in a theater.
These constraints all require there to be a single up-to-date value (the account bal‐
ance, the stock level, the seat occupancy) that all nodes agree on.
In real applications, it is sometimes acceptable to treat such constraints loosely (for
example, if a flight is overbooked, you can move customers to a different flight and
offer them compensation for the inconvenience). In such cases, linearizability may
not be needed, and we will discuss such loosely interpreted constraints in “Timeliness
and Integrity” on page 524.
However, a hard uniqueness constraint, such as the one you typically find in rela‐
tional databases, requires linearizability. Other kinds of constraints, such as foreign
key or attribute constraints, can be implemented without requiring linearizability
[19].
Cross-channel timing dependencies
Notice a detail in Figure 9-1: if Alice hadn’t exclaimed the score, Bob wouldn’t have
known that the result of his query was stale. He would have just refreshed the page
again a few seconds later, and eventually seen the final score. The linearizability viola‐
tion was only noticed because there was an additional communication channel in the
system (Alice’s voice to Bob’s ears).
Similar situations can arise in computer systems. For example, say you have a website
where users can upload a photo, and a background process resizes the photos to
lower resolution for faster download (thumbnails). The architecture and dataflow of
this system is illustrated in Figure 9-5.
The image resizer needs to be explicitly instructed to perform a resizing job, and this
instruction is sent from the web server to the resizer via a message queue (see Chap‐
ter 11). The web server doesn’t place the entire photo on the queue, since most mes‐
sage brokers are designed for small messages, and a photo may be several megabytes
in size. Instead, the photo is first written to a file storage service, and once the write is
complete, the instruction to the resizer is placed on the queue.
Linearizability | 331

Figure 9-5. The web server and image resizer communicate both through file storage
and a message queue, opening the potential for race conditions.
If the file storage service is linearizable, then this system should work fine. If it is not
linearizable, there is the risk of a race condition: the message queue (steps 3 and 4 in
Figure 9-5) might be faster than the internal replication inside the storage service. In
this case, when the resizer fetches the image (step 5), it might see an old version of the
image, or nothing at all. If it processes an old version of the image, the full-size and
resized images in the file storage become permanently inconsistent.
This problem arises because there are two different communication channels
between the web server and the resizer: the file storage and the message queue.
Without the recency guarantee of linearizability, race conditions between these two
channels are possible. This situation is analogous to Figure 9-1, where there was also
a race condition between two communication channels: the database replication and
the real-life audio channel between Alice’s mouth and Bob’s ears.
Linearizability is not the only way of avoiding this race condition, but it’s the simplest
to understand. If you control the additional communication channel (like in the case
of the message queue, but not in the case of Alice and Bob), you can use alternative
approaches similar to what we discussed in “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162,
at the cost of additional complexity.
Implementing Linearizable Systems
Now that we’ve looked at a few examples in which linearizability is useful, let’s think
about how we might implement a system that offers linearizable semantics.
Since linearizability essentially means “behave as though there is only a single copy of
the data, and all operations on it are atomic,” the simplest answer would be to really
only use a single copy of the data. However, that approach would not be able to toler‐
ate faults: if the node holding that one copy failed, the data would be lost, or at least
inaccessible until the node was brought up again.
332 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

The most common approach to making a system fault-tolerant is to use replication.
Let’s revisit the replication methods from Chapter 5, and compare whether they can
be made linearizable:
Single-leader replication (potentially linearizable)
In a system with single-leader replication (see “Leaders and Followers” on page
152), the leader has the primary copy of the data that is used for writes, and the
followers maintain backup copies of the data on other nodes. If you make reads
from the leader, or from synchronously updated followers, they have the poten‐
tial to be linearizable.iv However, not every single-leader database is actually line‐
arizable, either by design (e.g., because it uses snapshot isolation) or due to
concurrency bugs [10].
Using the leader for reads relies on the assumption that you know for sure who
the leader is. As discussed in “The Truth Is Defined by the Majority” on page
300, it is quite possible for a node to think that it is the leader, when in fact it is
not—and if the delusional leader continues to serve requests, it is likely to violate
linearizability [20]. With asynchronous replication, failover may even lose com‐
mitted writes (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156), which violates both
durability and linearizability.
Consensus algorithms (linearizable)
Some consensus algorithms, which we will discuss later in this chapter, bear a
resemblance to single-leader replication. However, consensus protocols contain
measures to prevent split brain and stale replicas. Thanks to these details, con‐
sensus algorithms can implement linearizable storage safely. This is how Zoo‐
Keeper [21] and etcd [22] work, for example.
Multi-leader replication (not linearizable)
Systems with multi-leader replication are generally not linearizable, because they
concurrently process writes on multiple nodes and asynchronously replicate
them to other nodes. For this reason, they can produce conflicting writes that
require resolution (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171). Such conflicts
are an artifact of the lack of a single copy of the data.
Leaderless replication (probably not linearizable)
For systems with leaderless replication (Dynamo-style; see “Leaderless Replica‐
tion” on page 177), people sometimes claim that you can obtain “strong consis‐
tency” by requiring quorum reads and writes (w + r > n). Depending on the exact
iv. Partitioning (sharding) a single-leader database, so that there is a separate leader per partition, does not
affect linearizability, since it is only a single-object guarantee. Cross-partition transactions are a different mat‐
ter (see “Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352).
Linearizability | 333

configuration of the quorums, and depending on how you define strong consis‐
tency, this is not quite true.
“Last write wins” conflict resolution methods based on time-of-day clocks (e.g.,
in Cassandra; see “Relying on Synchronized Clocks” on page 291) are almost cer‐
tainly nonlinearizable, because clock timestamps cannot be guaranteed to be
consistent with actual event ordering due to clock skew. Sloppy quorums
(“Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff” on page 183) also ruin any chance of
linearizability. Even with strict quorums, nonlinearizable behavior is possible, as
demonstrated in the next section.
Linearizability and quorums
Intuitively, it seems as though strict quorum reads and writes should be linearizable
in a Dynamo-style model. However, when we have variable network delays, it is pos‐
sible to have race conditions, as demonstrated in Figure 9-6.
Figure 9-6. A nonlinearizable execution, despite using a strict quorum.
In Figure 9-6, the initial value of x is 0, and a writer client is updating x to 1 by send‐
ing the write to all three replicas (n = 3, w = 3). Concurrently, client A reads from a
quorum of two nodes (r = 2) and sees the new value 1 on one of the nodes. Also con‐
currently with the write, client B reads from a different quorum of two nodes, and
gets back the old value 0 from both.
The quorum condition is met (w + r > n), but this execution is nevertheless not line‐
arizable: B’s request begins after A’s request completes, but B returns the old value
334 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

while A returns the new value. (It’s once again the Alice and Bob situation from
Figure 9-1.)
Interestingly, it is possible to make Dynamo-style quorums linearizable at the cost of
reduced performance: a reader must perform read repair (see “Read repair and anti-
entropy” on page 178) synchronously, before returning results to the application
[23], and a writer must read the latest state of a quorum of nodes before sending its
writes [24, 25]. However, Riak does not perform synchronous read repair due to the
performance penalty [26]. Cassandra does wait for read repair to complete on quo‐
rum reads [27], but it loses linearizability if there are multiple concurrent writes to
the same key, due to its use of last-write-wins conflict resolution.
Moreover, only linearizable read and write operations can be implemented in this
way; a linearizable compare-and-set operation cannot, because it requires a consen‐
sus algorithm [28].
In summary, it is safest to assume that a leaderless system with Dynamo-style replica‐
tion does not provide linearizability.
The Cost of Linearizability
As some replication methods can provide linearizability and others cannot, it is inter‐
esting to explore the pros and cons of linearizability in more depth.
We already discussed some use cases for different replication methods in Chapter 5;
for example, we saw that multi-leader replication is often a good choice for multi-
datacenter replication (see “Multi-datacenter operation” on page 168). An example of
such a deployment is illustrated in Figure 9-7.
Figure 9-7. A network interruption forcing a choice between linearizability and availa‐
bility.
Linearizability | 335

Consider what happens if there is a network interruption between the two datacen‐
ters. Let’s assume that the network within each datacenter is working, and clients can
reach the datacenters, but the datacenters cannot connect to each other.
With a multi-leader database, each datacenter can continue operating normally: since
writes from one datacenter are asynchronously replicated to the other, the writes are
simply queued up and exchanged when network connectivity is restored.
On the other hand, if single-leader replication is used, then the leader must be in one
of the datacenters. Any writes and any linearizable reads must be sent to the leader—
thus, for any clients connected to a follower datacenter, those read and write requests
must be sent synchronously over the network to the leader datacenter.
If the network between datacenters is interrupted in a single-leader setup, clients con‐
nected to follower datacenters cannot contact the leader, so they cannot make any
writes to the database, nor any linearizable reads. They can still make reads from the
follower, but they might be stale (nonlinearizable). If the application requires linear‐
izable reads and writes, the network interruption causes the application to become
unavailable in the datacenters that cannot contact the leader.
If clients can connect directly to the leader datacenter, this is not a problem, since the
application continues to work normally there. But clients that can only reach a fol‐
lower datacenter will experience an outage until the network link is repaired.
The CAP theorem
This issue is not just a consequence of single-leader and multi-leader replication: any
linearizable database has this problem, no matter how it is implemented. The issue
also isn’t specific to multi-datacenter deployments, but can occur on any unreliable
network, even within one datacenter. The trade-off is as follows:v
• If your application requires linearizability, and some replicas are disconnected
from the other replicas due to a network problem, then some replicas cannot
process requests while they are disconnected: they must either wait until the net‐
work problem is fixed, or return an error (either way, they become unavailable).
• If your application does not require linearizability, then it can be written in a way
that each replica can process requests independently, even if it is disconnected
from other replicas (e.g., multi-leader). In this case, the application can remain
available in the face of a network problem, but its behavior is not linearizable.
v. These two choices are sometimes known as CP (consistent but not available under network partitions) and
AP (available but not consistent under network partitions), respectively. However, this classification scheme
has several flaws [9], so it is best avoided.
336 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Thus, applications that don’t require linearizability can be more tolerant of network
problems. This insight is popularly known as the CAP theorem [29, 30, 31, 32],
named by Eric Brewer in 2000, although the trade-off has been known to designers of
distributed databases since the 1970s [33, 34, 35, 36].
CAP was originally proposed as a rule of thumb, without precise definitions, with the
goal of starting a discussion about trade-offs in databases. At the time, many dis‐
tributed databases focused on providing linearizable semantics on a cluster of
machines with shared storage [18], and CAP encouraged database engineers to
explore a wider design space of distributed shared-nothing systems, which were more
suitable for implementing large-scale web services [37]. CAP deserves credit for this
culture shift—witness the explosion of new database technologies since the
mid-2000s (known as NoSQL).
The Unhelpful CAP Theorem
CAP is sometimes presented as Consistency, Availability, Partition tolerance: pick 2
out of 3. Unfortunately, putting it this way is misleading [32] because network parti‐
tions are a kind of fault, so they aren’t something about which you have a choice: they
will happen whether you like it or not [38].
At times when the network is working correctly, a system can provide both consis‐
tency (linearizability) and total availability. When a network fault occurs, you have to
choose between either linearizability or total availability. Thus, a better way of phras‐
ing CAP would be either Consistent or Available when Partitioned [39]. A more relia‐
ble network needs to make this choice less often, but at some point the choice is
inevitable.
In discussions of CAP there are several contradictory definitions of the term availa‐
bility, and the formalization as a theorem [30] does not match its usual meaning [40].
Many so-called “highly available” (fault-tolerant) systems actually do not meet CAP’s
idiosyncratic definition of availability. All in all, there is a lot of misunderstanding
and confusion around CAP, and it does not help us understand systems better, so
CAP is best avoided.
The CAP theorem as formally defined [30] is of very narrow scope: it only considers
one consistency model (namely linearizability) and one kind of fault (network parti‐
tions,vi or nodes that are alive but disconnected from each other). It doesn’t say any‐
vi. As discussed in “Network Faults in Practice” on page 279, this book uses partitioning to refer to deliber‐
ately breaking down a large dataset into smaller ones (sharding; see Chapter 6). By contrast, a network parti‐
tion is a particular type of network fault, which we normally don’t consider separately from other kinds of
faults. However, since it’s the P in CAP, we can’t avoid the confusion in this case.
Linearizability | 337

thing about network delays, dead nodes, or other trade-offs. Thus, although CAP has
been historically influential, it has little practical value for designing systems [9, 40].
There are many more interesting impossibility results in distributed systems [41],
and CAP has now been superseded by more precise results [2, 42], so it is of mostly
historical interest today.
Linearizability and network delays
Although linearizability is a useful guarantee, surprisingly few systems are actually
linearizable in practice. For example, even RAM on a modern multi-core CPU is not
linearizable [43]: if a thread running on one CPU core writes to a memory address,
and a thread on another CPU core reads the same address shortly afterward, it is not
guaranteed to read the value written by the first thread (unless a memory barrier or
fence [44] is used).
The reason for this behavior is that every CPU core has its own memory cache and
store buffer. Memory access first goes to the cache by default, and any changes are
asynchronously written out to main memory. Since accessing data in the cache is
much faster than going to main memory [45], this feature is essential for good per‐
formance on modern CPUs. However, there are now several copies of the data (one
in main memory, and perhaps several more in various caches), and these copies are
asynchronously updated, so linearizability is lost.
Why make this trade-off? It makes no sense to use the CAP theorem to justify the
multi-core memory consistency model: within one computer we usually assume reli‐
able communication, and we don’t expect one CPU core to be able to continue oper‐
ating normally if it is disconnected from the rest of the computer. The reason for
dropping linearizability is performance, not fault tolerance.
The same is true of many distributed databases that choose not to provide lineariza‐
ble guarantees: they do so primarily to increase performance, not so much for fault
tolerance [46]. Linearizability is slow—and this is true all the time, not only during a
network fault.
Can’t we maybe find a more efficient implementation of linearizable storage? It
seems the answer is no: Attiya and Welch [47] prove that if you want linearizability,
the response time of read and write requests is at least proportional to the uncertainty
of delays in the network. In a network with highly variable delays, like most com‐
puter networks (see “Timeouts and Unbounded Delays” on page 281), the response
time of linearizable reads and writes is inevitably going to be high. A faster algorithm
for linearizability does not exist, but weaker consistency models can be much faster,
so this trade-off is important for latency-sensitive systems. In Chapter 12 we will dis‐
cuss some approaches for avoiding linearizability without sacrificing correctness.
338 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Ordering Guarantees
We said previously that a linearizable register behaves as if there is only a single copy
of the data, and that every operation appears to take effect atomically at one point in
time. This definition implies that operations are executed in some well-defined order.
We illustrated the ordering in Figure 9-4 by joining up the operations in the order in
which they seem to have executed.
Ordering has been a recurring theme in this book, which suggests that it might be an
important fundamental idea. Let’s briefly recap some of the other contexts in which
we have discussed ordering:
• In Chapter 5 we saw that the main purpose of the leader in single-leader replica‐
tion is to determine the order of writes in the replication log—that is, the order in
which followers apply those writes. If there is no single leader, conflicts can occur
due to concurrent operations (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171).
• Serializability, which we discussed in Chapter 7, is about ensuring that transac‐
tions behave as if they were executed in some sequential order. It can be achieved
by literally executing transactions in that serial order, or by allowing concurrent
execution while preventing serialization conflicts (by locking or aborting).
• The use of timestamps and clocks in distributed systems that we discussed in
Chapter 8 (see “Relying on Synchronized Clocks” on page 291) is another
attempt to introduce order into a disorderly world, for example to determine
which one of two writes happened later.
It turns out that there are deep connections between ordering, linearizability, and
consensus. Although this notion is a bit more theoretical and abstract than the rest of
this book, it is very helpful for clarifying our understanding of what systems can and
cannot do. We will explore this topic in the next few sections.
Ordering and Causality
There are several reasons why ordering keeps coming up, and one of the reasons is
that it helps preserve causality. We have already seen several examples over the
course of this book where causality has been important:
• In “Consistent Prefix Reads” on page 165 (Figure 5-5) we saw an example where
the observer of a conversation saw first the answer to a question, and then the
question being answered. This is confusing because it violates our intuition of
cause and effect: if a question is answered, then clearly the question had to be
there first, because the person giving the answer must have seen the question
(assuming they are not psychic and cannot see into the future). We say that there
is a causal dependency between the question and the answer.
Ordering Guarantees | 339

• A similar pattern appeared in Figure 5-9, where we looked at the replication
between three leaders and noticed that some writes could “overtake” others due
to network delays. From the perspective of one of the replicas it would look as
though there was an update to a row that did not exist. Causality here means that
a row must first be created before it can be updated.
• In “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 we observed that if you have two
operations A and B, there are three possibilities: either A happened before B, or B
happened before A, or A and B are concurrent. This happened before relationship
is another expression of causality: if A happened before B, that means B might
have known about A, or built upon A, or depended on A. If A and B are concur‐
rent, there is no causal link between them; in other words, we are sure that nei‐
ther knew about the other.
• In the context of snapshot isolation for transactions (“Snapshot Isolation and
Repeatable Read” on page 237), we said that a transaction reads from a consistent
snapshot. But what does “consistent” mean in this context? It means consistent
with causality: if the snapshot contains an answer, it must also contain the ques‐
tion being answered [48]. Observing the entire database at a single point in time
makes it consistent with causality: the effects of all operations that happened cau‐
sally before that point in time are visible, but no operations that happened cau‐
sally afterward can be seen. Read skew (non-repeatable reads, as illustrated in
Figure 7-6) means reading data in a state that violates causality.
• Our examples of write skew between transactions (see “Write Skew and Phan‐
toms” on page 246) also demonstrated causal dependencies: in Figure 7-8, Alice
was allowed to go off call because the transaction thought that Bob was still on
call, and vice versa. In this case, the action of going off call is causally dependent
on the observation of who is currently on call. Serializable snapshot isolation (see
“Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)” on page 261) detects write skew by track‐
ing the causal dependencies between transactions.
• In the example of Alice and Bob watching football (Figure 9-1), the fact that Bob
got a stale result from the server after hearing Alice exclaim the result is a causal‐
ity violation: Alice’s exclamation is causally dependent on the announcement of
the score, so Bob should also be able to see the score after hearing Alice. The
same pattern appeared again in “Cross-channel timing dependencies” on page
331 in the guise of an image resizing service.
Causality imposes an ordering on events: cause comes before effect; a message is sent
before that message is received; the question comes before the answer. And, like in
real life, one thing leads to another: one node reads some data and then writes some‐
thing as a result, another node reads the thing that was written and writes something
else in turn, and so on. These chains of causally dependent operations define the
causal order in the system—i.e., what happened before what.
340 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

If a system obeys the ordering imposed by causality, we say that it is causally consis‐
tent. For example, snapshot isolation provides causal consistency: when you read
from the database, and you see some piece of data, then you must also be able to see
any data that causally precedes it (assuming it has not been deleted in the meantime).
The causal order is not a total order
A total order allows any two elements to be compared, so if you have two elements,
you can always say which one is greater and which one is smaller. For example, natu‐
ral numbers are totally ordered: if I give you any two numbers, say 5 and 13, you can
tell me that 13 is greater than 5.
However, mathematical sets are not totally ordered: is {a, b} greater than {b, c}? Well,
you can’t really compare them, because neither is a subset of the other. We say they
are incomparable, and therefore mathematical sets are partially ordered: in some cases
one set is greater than another (if one set contains all the elements of another), but in
other cases they are incomparable.
The difference between a total order and a partial order is reflected in different data‐
base consistency models:
Linearizability
In a linearizable system, we have a total order of operations: if the system behaves
as if there is only a single copy of the data, and every operation is atomic, this
means that for any two operations we can always say which one happened first.
This total ordering is illustrated as a timeline in Figure 9-4.
Causality
We said that two operations are concurrent if neither happened before the other
(see “The “happens-before” relationship and concurrency” on page 186). Put
another way, two events are ordered if they are causally related (one happened
before the other), but they are incomparable if they are concurrent. This means
that causality defines a partial order, not a total order: some operations are
ordered with respect to each other, but some are incomparable.
Therefore, according to this definition, there are no concurrent operations in a line‐
arizable datastore: there must be a single timeline along which all operations are
totally ordered. There might be several requests waiting to be handled, but the data‐
store ensures that every request is handled atomically at a single point in time, acting
on a single copy of the data, along a single timeline, without any concurrency.
Concurrency would mean that the timeline branches and merges again—and in this
case, operations on different branches are incomparable (i.e., concurrent). We saw
this phenomenon in Chapter 5: for example, Figure 5-14 is not a straight-line total
order, but rather a jumble of different operations going on concurrently. The arrows
in the diagram indicate causal dependencies—the partial ordering of operations.
Ordering Guarantees | 341

If you are familiar with distributed version control systems such as Git, their version
histories are very much like the graph of causal dependencies. Often one commit
happens after another, in a straight line, but sometimes you get branches (when sev‐
eral people concurrently work on a project), and merges are created when those con‐
currently created commits are combined.
Linearizability is stronger than causal consistency
So what is the relationship between the causal order and linearizability? The answer is
that linearizability implies causality: any system that is linearizable will preserve cau‐
sality correctly [7]. In particular, if there are multiple communication channels in a
system (such as the message queue and the file storage service in Figure 9-5), lineariz‐
ability ensures that causality is automatically preserved without the system having to
do anything special (such as passing around timestamps between different compo‐
nents).
The fact that linearizability ensures causality is what makes linearizable systems sim‐
ple to understand and appealing. However, as discussed in “The Cost of Linearizabil‐
ity” on page 335, making a system linearizable can harm its performance and
availability, especially if the system has significant network delays (for example, if it’s
geographically distributed). For this reason, some distributed data systems have
abandoned linearizability, which allows them to achieve better performance but can
make them difficult to work with.
The good news is that a middle ground is possible. Linearizability is not the only way
of preserving causality—there are other ways too. A system can be causally consistent
without incurring the performance hit of making it linearizable (in particular, the
CAP theorem does not apply). In fact, causal consistency is the strongest possible
consistency model that does not slow down due to network delays, and remains
available in the face of network failures [2, 42].
In many cases, systems that appear to require linearizability in fact only really require
causal consistency, which can be implemented more efficiently. Based on this obser‐
vation, researchers are exploring new kinds of databases that preserve causality, with
performance and availability characteristics that are similar to those of eventually
consistent systems [49, 50, 51].
As this research is quite recent, not much of it has yet made its way into production
systems, and there are still challenges to be overcome [52, 53]. However, it is a prom‐
ising direction for future systems.
Capturing causal dependencies
We won’t go into all the nitty-gritty details of how nonlinearizable systems can main‐
tain causal consistency here, but just briefly explore some of the key ideas.
342 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

In order to maintain causality, you need to know which operation happened before
which other operation. This is a partial order: concurrent operations may be pro‐
cessed in any order, but if one operation happened before another, then they must be
processed in that order on every replica. Thus, when a replica processes an operation,
it must ensure that all causally preceding operations (all operations that happened
before) have already been processed; if some preceding operation is missing, the later
operation must wait until the preceding operation has been processed.
In order to determine causal dependencies, we need some way of describing the
“knowledge” of a node in the system. If a node had already seen the value X when it
issued the write Y, then X and Y may be causally related. The analysis uses the kinds
of questions you would expect in a criminal investigation of fraud charges: did the
CEO know about X at the time when they made decision Y?
The techniques for determining which operation happened before which other oper‐
ation are similar to what we discussed in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184.
That section discussed causality in a leaderless datastore, where we need to detect
concurrent writes to the same key in order to prevent lost updates. Causal consis‐
tency goes further: it needs to track causal dependencies across the entire database,
not just for a single key. Version vectors can be generalized to do this [54].
In order to determine the causal ordering, the database needs to know which version
of the data was read by the application. This is why, in Figure 5-13, the version num‐
ber from the prior operation is passed back to the database on a write. A similar idea
appears in the conflict detection of SSI, as discussed in “Serializable Snapshot Isola‐
tion (SSI)” on page 261: when a transaction wants to commit, the database checks
whether the version of the data that it read is still up to date. To this end, the database
keeps track of which data has been read by which transaction.
Sequence Number Ordering
Although causality is an important theoretical concept, actually keeping track of all
causal dependencies can become impractical. In many applications, clients read lots
of data before writing something, and then it is not clear whether the write is causally
dependent on all or only some of those prior reads. Explicitly tracking all the data
that has been read would mean a large overhead.
However, there is a better way: we can use sequence numbers or timestamps to order
events. A timestamp need not come from a time-of-day clock (or physical clock,
which have many problems, as discussed in “Unreliable Clocks” on page 287). It can
instead come from a logical clock, which is an algorithm to generate a sequence of
numbers to identify operations, typically using counters that are incremented for
every operation.
Ordering Guarantees | 343

Such sequence numbers or timestamps are compact (only a few bytes in size), and
they provide a total order: that is, every operation has a unique sequence number, and
you can always compare two sequence numbers to determine which is greater (i.e.,
which operation happened later).
In particular, we can create sequence numbers in a total order that is consistent with
causality:vii we promise that if operation A causally happened before B, then A occurs
before B in the total order (A has a lower sequence number than B). Concurrent
operations may be ordered arbitrarily. Such a total order captures all the causality
information, but also imposes more ordering than strictly required by causality.
In a database with single-leader replication (see “Leaders and Followers” on page
152), the replication log defines a total order of write operations that is consistent
with causality. The leader can simply increment a counter for each operation, and
thus assign a monotonically increasing sequence number to each operation in the
replication log. If a follower applies the writes in the order they appear in the replica‐
tion log, the state of the follower is always causally consistent (even if it is lagging
behind the leader).
Noncausal sequence number generators
If there is not a single leader (perhaps because you are using a multi-leader or leader‐
less database, or because the database is partitioned), it is less clear how to generate
sequence numbers for operations. Various methods are used in practice:
• Each node can generate its own independent set of sequence numbers. For exam‐
ple, if you have two nodes, one node can generate only odd numbers and the
other only even numbers. In general, you could reserve some bits in the binary
representation of the sequence number to contain a unique node identifier, and
this would ensure that two different nodes can never generate the same sequence
number.
• You can attach a timestamp from a time-of-day clock (physical clock) to each
operation [55]. Such timestamps are not sequential, but if they have sufficiently
high resolution, they might be sufficient to totally order operations. This fact is
used in the last write wins conflict resolution method (see “Timestamps for
ordering events” on page 291).
• You can preallocate blocks of sequence numbers. For example, node A might
claim the block of sequence numbers from 1 to 1,000, and node B might claim
vii. A total order that is inconsistent with causality is easy to create, but not very useful. For example, you can
generate a random UUID for each operation, and compare UUIDs lexicographically to define the total order‐
ing of operations. This is a valid total order, but the random UUIDs tell you nothing about which operation
actually happened first, or whether the operations were concurrent.
344 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

the block from 1,001 to 2,000. Then each node can independently assign
sequence numbers from its block, and allocate a new block when its supply of
sequence numbers begins to run low.
These three options all perform better and are more scalable than pushing all opera‐
tions through a single leader that increments a counter. They generate a unique,
approximately increasing sequence number for each operation. However, they all
have a problem: the sequence numbers they generate are not consistent with causality.
The causality problems occur because these sequence number generators do not cor‐
rectly capture the ordering of operations across different nodes:
• Each node may process a different number of operations per second. Thus, if one
node generates even numbers and the other generates odd numbers, the counter
for even numbers may lag behind the counter for odd numbers, or vice versa. If
you have an odd-numbered operation and an even-numbered operation, you
cannot accurately tell which one causally happened first.
• Timestamps from physical clocks are subject to clock skew, which can make
them inconsistent with causality. For example, see Figure 8-3, which shows a sce‐
nario in which an operation that happened causally later was actually assigned a
lower timestamp.viii
• In the case of the block allocator, one operation may be given a sequence number
in the range from 1,001 to 2,000, and a causally later operation may be given a
number in the range from 1 to 1,000. Here, again, the sequence number is incon‐
sistent with causality.
Lamport timestamps
Although the three sequence number generators just described are inconsistent with
causality, there is actually a simple method for generating sequence numbers that is
consistent with causality. It is called a Lamport timestamp, proposed in 1978 by Leslie
Lamport [56], in what is now one of the most-cited papers in the field of distributed
systems.
The use of Lamport timestamps is illustrated in Figure 9-8. Each node has a unique
identifier, and each node keeps a counter of the number of operations it has pro‐
cessed. The Lamport timestamp is then simply a pair of (counter, node ID). Two
viii. It is possible to make physical clock timestamps consistent with causality: in “Synchronized clocks for
global snapshots” on page 294 we discussed Google’s Spanner, which estimates the expected clock skew and
waits out the uncertainty interval before committing a write. This method ensures that a causally later trans‐
action is given a greater timestamp. However, most clocks cannot provide the required uncertainty metric.
Ordering Guarantees | 345

nodes may sometimes have the same counter value, but by including the node ID in
the timestamp, each timestamp is made unique.
Figure 9-8. Lamport timestamps provide a total ordering consistent with causality.
A Lamport timestamp bears no relationship to a physical time-of-day clock, but it
provides total ordering: if you have two timestamps, the one with a greater counter
value is the greater timestamp; if the counter values are the same, the one with the
greater node ID is the greater timestamp.
So far this description is essentially the same as the even/odd counters described in
the last section. The key idea about Lamport timestamps, which makes them consis‐
tent with causality, is the following: every node and every client keeps track of the
maximum counter value it has seen so far, and includes that maximum on every
request. When a node receives a request or response with a maximum counter value
greater than its own counter value, it immediately increases its own counter to that
maximum.
This is shown in Figure 9-8, where client A receives a counter value of 5 from node 2,
and then sends that maximum of 5 to node 1. At that time, node 1’s counter was only
1, but it was immediately moved forward to 5, so the next operation had an incre‐
mented counter value of 6.
As long as the maximum counter value is carried along with every operation, this
scheme ensures that the ordering from the Lamport timestamps is consistent with
causality, because every causal dependency results in an increased timestamp.
Lamport timestamps are sometimes confused with version vectors, which we saw in
“Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184. Although there are some similarities,
they have a different purpose: version vectors can distinguish whether two operations
are concurrent or whether one is causally dependent on the other, whereas Lamport
timestamps always enforce a total ordering. From the total ordering of Lamport time‐
346 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

stamps, you cannot tell whether two operations are concurrent or whether they are
causally dependent. The advantage of Lamport timestamps over version vectors is
that they are more compact.
Timestamp ordering is not sufficient
Although Lamport timestamps define a total order of operations that is consistent
with causality, they are not quite sufficient to solve many common problems in dis‐
tributed systems.
For example, consider a system that needs to ensure that a username uniquely identi‐
fies a user account. If two users concurrently try to create an account with the same
username, one of the two should succeed and the other should fail. (We touched on
this problem previously in “The leader and the lock” on page 301.)
At first glance, it seems as though a total ordering of operations (e.g., using Lamport
timestamps) should be sufficient to solve this problem: if two accounts with the same
username are created, pick the one with the lower timestamp as the winner (the one
who grabbed the username first), and let the one with the greater timestamp fail.
Since timestamps are totally ordered, this comparison is always valid.
This approach works for determining the winner after the fact: once you have collec‐
ted all the username creation operations in the system, you can compare their time‐
stamps. However, it is not sufficient when a node has just received a request from a
user to create a username, and needs to decide right now whether the request should
succeed or fail. At that moment, the node does not know whether another node is
concurrently in the process of creating an account with the same username, and what
timestamp that other node may assign to the operation.
In order to be sure that no other node is in the process of concurrently creating an
account with the same username and a lower timestamp, you would have to check
with every other node to see what it is doing [56]. If one of the other nodes has failed
or cannot be reached due to a network problem, this system would grind to a halt.
This is not the kind of fault-tolerant system that we need.
The problem here is that the total order of operations only emerges after you have
collected all of the operations. If another node has generated some operations, but
you don’t yet know what they are, you cannot construct the final ordering of opera‐
tions: the unknown operations from the other node may need to be inserted at vari‐
ous positions in the total order.
To conclude: in order to implement something like a uniqueness constraint for user‐
names, it’s not sufficient to have a total ordering of operations—you also need to
know when that order is finalized. If you have an operation to create a username, and
you are sure that no other node can insert a claim for the same username ahead of
your operation in the total order, then you can safely declare the operation successful.
Ordering Guarantees | 347

This idea of knowing when your total order is finalized is captured in the topic of
total order broadcast.
Total Order Broadcast
If your program runs only on a single CPU core, it is easy to define a total ordering of
operations: it is simply the order in which they were executed by the CPU. However,
in a distributed system, getting all nodes to agree on the same total ordering of opera‐
tions is tricky. In the last section we discussed ordering by timestamps or sequence
numbers, but found that it is not as powerful as single-leader replication (if you use
timestamp ordering to implement a uniqueness constraint, you cannot tolerate any
faults).
As discussed, single-leader replication determines a total order of operations by
choosing one node as the leader and sequencing all operations on a single CPU core
on the leader. The challenge then is how to scale the system if the throughput is
greater than a single leader can handle, and also how to handle failover if the leader
fails (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156). In the distributed systems litera‐
ture, this problem is known as total order broadcast or atomic broadcast [25, 57, 58].ix
Scope of ordering guarantee
Partitioned databases with a single leader per partition often main‐
tain ordering only per partition, which means they cannot offer
consistency guarantees (e.g., consistent snapshots, foreign key ref‐
erences) across partitions. Total ordering across all partitions is
possible, but requires additional coordination [59].
Total order broadcast is usually described as a protocol for exchanging messages
between nodes. Informally, it requires that two safety properties always be satisfied:
Reliable delivery
No messages are lost: if a message is delivered to one node, it is delivered to all
nodes.
Totally ordered delivery
Messages are delivered to every node in the same order.
A correct algorithm for total order broadcast must ensure that the reliability and
ordering properties are always satisfied, even if a node or the network is faulty. Of
ix. The term atomic broadcast is traditional, but it is very confusing as it’s inconsistent with other uses of the
word atomic: it has nothing to do with atomicity in ACID transactions and is only indirectly related to atomic
operations (in the sense of multi-threaded programming) or atomic registers (linearizable storage). The term
total order multicast is another synonym.
348 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

course, messages will not be delivered while the network is interrupted, but an algo‐
rithm can keep retrying so that the messages get through when the network is even‐
tually repaired (and then they must still be delivered in the correct order).
Using total order broadcast
Consensus services such as ZooKeeper and etcd actually implement total order
broadcast. This fact is a hint that there is a strong connection between total order
broadcast and consensus, which we will explore later in this chapter.
Total order broadcast is exactly what you need for database replication: if every mes‐
sage represents a write to the database, and every replica processes the same writes in
the same order, then the replicas will remain consistent with each other (aside from
any temporary replication lag). This principle is known as state machine replication
[60], and we will return to it in Chapter 11.
Similarly, total order broadcast can be used to implement serializable transactions: as
discussed in “Actual Serial Execution” on page 252, if every message represents a
deterministic transaction to be executed as a stored procedure, and if every node pro‐
cesses those messages in the same order, then the partitions and replicas of the data‐
base are kept consistent with each other [61].
An important aspect of total order broadcast is that the order is fixed at the time the
messages are delivered: a node is not allowed to retroactively insert a message into an
earlier position in the order if subsequent messages have already been delivered. This
fact makes total order broadcast stronger than timestamp ordering.
Another way of looking at total order broadcast is that it is a way of creating a log (as
in a replication log, transaction log, or write-ahead log): delivering a message is like
appending to the log. Since all nodes must deliver the same messages in the same
order, all nodes can read the log and see the same sequence of messages.
Total order broadcast is also useful for implementing a lock service that provides
fencing tokens (see “Fencing tokens” on page 303). Every request to acquire the lock
is appended as a message to the log, and all messages are sequentially numbered in
the order they appear in the log. The sequence number can then serve as a fencing
token, because it is monotonically increasing. In ZooKeeper, this sequence number is
called zxid [15].
Ordering Guarantees | 349

Implementing linearizable storage using total order broadcast
As illustrated in Figure 9-4, in a linearizable system there is a total order of opera‐
tions. Does that mean linearizability is the same as total order broadcast? Not quite,
but there are close links between the two.x
Total order broadcast is asynchronous: messages are guaranteed to be delivered relia‐
bly in a fixed order, but there is no guarantee about when a message will be delivered
(so one recipient may lag behind the others). By contrast, linearizability is a recency
guarantee: a read is guaranteed to see the latest value written.
However, if you have total order broadcast, you can build linearizable storage on top
of it. For example, you can ensure that usernames uniquely identify user accounts.
Imagine that for every possible username, you can have a linearizable register with an
atomic compare-and-set operation. Every register initially has the value null (indi‐
cating that the username is not taken). When a user wants to create a username, you
execute a compare-and-set operation on the register for that username, setting it to
the user account ID, under the condition that the previous register value is null. If
multiple users try to concurrently grab the same username, only one of the compare-
and-set operations will succeed, because the others will see a value other than null
(due to linearizability).
You can implement such a linearizable compare-and-set operation as follows by
using total order broadcast as an append-only log [62, 63]:
1. Append a message to the log, tentatively indicating the username you want to
claim.
2. Read the log, and wait for the message you appended to be delivered back to
you.xi
3. Check for any messages claiming the username that you want. If the first message
for your desired username is your own message, then you are successful: you can
commit the username claim (perhaps by appending another message to the log)
and acknowledge it to the client. If the first message for your desired username is
from another user, you abort the operation.
x. In a formal sense, a linearizable read-write register is an “easier” problem. Total order broadcast is equiva‐
lent to consensus [67], which has no deterministic solution in the asynchronous crash-stop model [68],
whereas a linearizable read-write register can be implemented in the same system model [23, 24, 25]. How‐
ever, supporting atomic operations such as compare-and-set or increment-and-get in a register makes it
equivalent to consensus [28]. Thus, the problems of consensus and a linearizable register are closely related.
xi. If you don’t wait, but acknowledge the write immediately after it has been enqueued, you get something
similar to the memory consistency model of multi-core x86 processors [43]. That model is neither lineariza‐
ble nor sequentially consistent.
350 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Because log entries are delivered to all nodes in the same order, if there are several
concurrent writes, all nodes will agree on which one came first. Choosing the first of
the conflicting writes as the winner and aborting later ones ensures that all nodes
agree on whether a write was committed or aborted. A similar approach can be used
to implement serializable multi-object transactions on top of a log [62].
While this procedure ensures linearizable writes, it doesn’t guarantee linearizable
reads—if you read from a store that is asynchronously updated from the log, it may
be stale. (To be precise, the procedure described here provides sequential consistency
[47, 64], sometimes also known as timeline consistency [65, 66], a slightly weaker
guarantee than linearizability.) To make reads linearizable, there are a few options:
• You can sequence reads through the log by appending a message, reading the log,
and performing the actual read when the message is delivered back to you. The
message’s position in the log thus defines the point in time at which the read
happens. (Quorum reads in etcd work somewhat like this [16].)
• If the log allows you to fetch the position of the latest log message in a lineariza‐
ble way, you can query that position, wait for all entries up to that position to be
delivered to you, and then perform the read. (This is the idea behind Zoo‐
Keeper’s sync() operation [15].)
• You can make your read from a replica that is synchronously updated on writes,
and is thus sure to be up to date. (This technique is used in chain replication
[63]; see also “Research on Replication” on page 155.)
Implementing total order broadcast using linearizable storage
The last section showed how to build a linearizable compare-and-set operation from
total order broadcast. We can also turn it around, assume that we have linearizable
storage, and show how to build total order broadcast from it.
The easiest way is to assume you have a linearizable register that stores an integer and
that has an atomic increment-and-get operation [28]. Alternatively, an atomic
compare-and-set operation would also do the job.
The algorithm is simple: for every message you want to send through total order
broadcast, you increment-and-get the linearizable integer, and then attach the value
you got from the register as a sequence number to the message. You can then send
the message to all nodes (resending any lost messages), and the recipients will deliver
the messages consecutively by sequence number.
Note that unlike Lamport timestamps, the numbers you get from incrementing the
linearizable register form a sequence with no gaps. Thus, if a node has delivered mes‐
sage 4 and receives an incoming message with a sequence number of 6, it knows that
it must wait for message 5 before it can deliver message 6. The same is not the case
Ordering Guarantees | 351

with Lamport timestamps—in fact, this is the key difference between total order
broadcast and timestamp ordering.
How hard could it be to make a linearizable integer with an atomic increment-and-
get operation? As usual, if things never failed, it would be easy: you could just keep it
in a variable on one node. The problem lies in handling the situation when network
connections to that node are interrupted, and restoring the value when that node fails
[59]. In general, if you think hard enough about linearizable sequence number gener‐
ators, you inevitably end up with a consensus algorithm.
This is no coincidence: it can be proved that a linearizable compare-and-set (or
increment-and-get) register and total order broadcast are both equivalent to consen‐
sus [28, 67]. That is, if you can solve one of these problems, you can transform it into
a solution for the others. This is quite a profound and surprising insight!
It is time to finally tackle the consensus problem head-on, which we will do in the
rest of this chapter.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus
Consensus is one of the most important and fundamental problems in distributed
computing. On the surface, it seems simple: informally, the goal is simply to get sev‐
eral nodes to agree on something. You might think that this shouldn’t be too hard.
Unfortunately, many broken systems have been built in the mistaken belief that this
problem is easy to solve.
Although consensus is very important, the section about it appears late in this book
because the topic is quite subtle, and appreciating the subtleties requires some pre‐
requisite knowledge. Even in the academic research community, the understanding
of consensus only gradually crystallized over the course of decades, with many mis‐
understandings along the way. Now that we have discussed replication (Chapter 5),
transactions (Chapter 7), system models (Chapter 8), linearizability, and total order
broadcast (this chapter), we are finally ready to tackle the consensus problem.
There are a number of situations in which it is important for nodes to agree. For
example:
Leader election
In a database with single-leader replication, all nodes need to agree on which
node is the leader. The leadership position might become contested if some
nodes can’t communicate with others due to a network fault. In this case, con‐
sensus is important to avoid a bad failover, resulting in a split brain situation in
which two nodes both believe themselves to be the leader (see “Handling Node
Outages” on page 156). If there were two leaders, they would both accept writes
and their data would diverge, leading to inconsistency and data loss.
352 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Atomic commit
In a database that supports transactions spanning several nodes or partitions, we
have the problem that a transaction may fail on some nodes but succeed on oth‐
ers. If we want to maintain transaction atomicity (in the sense of ACID; see
“Atomicity” on page 223), we have to get all nodes to agree on the outcome of the
transaction: either they all abort/roll back (if anything goes wrong) or they all
commit (if nothing goes wrong). This instance of consensus is known as the
atomic commit problem.xii
The Impossibility of Consensus
You may have heard about the FLP result [68]—named after the authors Fischer,
Lynch, and Paterson—which proves that there is no algorithm that is always able to
reach consensus if there is a risk that a node may crash. In a distributed system, we
must assume that nodes may crash, so reliable consensus is impossible. Yet, here we
are, discussing algorithms for achieving consensus. What is going on here?
The answer is that the FLP result is proved in the asynchronous system model (see
“System Model and Reality” on page 306), a very restrictive model that assumes a
deterministic algorithm that cannot use any clocks or timeouts. If the algorithm is
allowed to use timeouts, or some other way of identifying suspected crashed nodes
(even if the suspicion is sometimes wrong), then consensus becomes solvable [67].
Even just allowing the algorithm to use random numbers is sufficient to get around
the impossibility result [69].
Thus, although the FLP result about the impossibility of consensus is of great theoret‐
ical importance, distributed systems can usually achieve consensus in practice.
In this section we will first examine the atomic commit problem in more detail. In
particular, we will discuss the two-phase commit (2PC) algorithm, which is the most
common way of solving atomic commit and which is implemented in various data‐
bases, messaging systems, and application servers. It turns out that 2PC is a kind of
consensus algorithm—but not a very good one [70, 71].
By learning from 2PC we will then work our way toward better consensus algorithms,
such as those used in ZooKeeper (Zab) and etcd (Raft).
xii. Atomic commit is formalized slightly differently from consensus: an atomic transaction can commit only
if all participants vote to commit, and must abort if any participant needs to abort. Consensus is allowed to
decide on any value that is proposed by one of the participants. However, atomic commit and consensus are
reducible to each other [70, 71]. Nonblocking atomic commit is harder than consensus—see “Three-phase
commit” on page 359.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 353

Atomic Commit and Two-Phase Commit (2PC)
In Chapter 7 we learned that the purpose of transaction atomicity is to provide sim‐
ple semantics in the case where something goes wrong in the middle of making sev‐
eral writes. The outcome of a transaction is either a successful commit, in which case
all of the transaction’s writes are made durable, or an abort, in which case all of the
transaction’s writes are rolled back (i.e., undone or discarded).
Atomicity prevents failed transactions from littering the database with half-finished
results and half-updated state. This is especially important for multi-object transac‐
tions (see “Single-Object and Multi-Object Operations” on page 228) and databases
that maintain secondary indexes. Each secondary index is a separate data structure
from the primary data—thus, if you modify some data, the corresponding change
needs to also be made in the secondary index. Atomicity ensures that the secondary
index stays consistent with the primary data (if the index became inconsistent with
the primary data, it would not be very useful).
From single-node to distributed atomic commit
For transactions that execute at a single database node, atomicity is commonly imple‐
mented by the storage engine. When the client asks the database node to commit the
transaction, the database makes the transaction’s writes durable (typically in a write-
ahead log; see “Making B-trees reliable” on page 82) and then appends a commit
record to the log on disk. If the database crashes in the middle of this process, the
transaction is recovered from the log when the node restarts: if the commit record
was successfully written to disk before the crash, the transaction is considered com‐
mitted; if not, any writes from that transaction are rolled back.
Thus, on a single node, transaction commitment crucially depends on the order in
which data is durably written to disk: first the data, then the commit record [72]. The
key deciding moment for whether the transaction commits or aborts is the moment
at which the disk finishes writing the commit record: before that moment, it is still
possible to abort (due to a crash), but after that moment, the transaction is commit‐
ted (even if the database crashes). Thus, it is a single device (the controller of one par‐
ticular disk drive, attached to one particular node) that makes the commit atomic.
However, what if multiple nodes are involved in a transaction? For example, perhaps
you have a multi-object transaction in a partitioned database, or a term-partitioned
secondary index (in which the index entry may be on a different node from the pri‐
mary data; see “Partitioning and Secondary Indexes” on page 206). Most “NoSQL”
distributed datastores do not support such distributed transactions, but various clus‐
tered relational systems do (see “Distributed Transactions in Practice” on page 360).
In these cases, it is not sufficient to simply send a commit request to all of the nodes
and independently commit the transaction on each one. In doing so, it could easily
354 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

happen that the commit succeeds on some nodes and fails on other nodes, which
would violate the atomicity guarantee:
• Some nodes may detect a constraint violation or conflict, making an abort neces‐
sary, while other nodes are successfully able to commit.
• Some of the commit requests might be lost in the network, eventually aborting
due to a timeout, while other commit requests get through.
• Some nodes may crash before the commit record is fully written and roll back on
recovery, while others successfully commit.
If some nodes commit the transaction but others abort it, the nodes become inconsis‐
tent with each other (like in Figure 7-3). And once a transaction has been committed
on one node, it cannot be retracted again if it later turns out that it was aborted on
another node. For this reason, a node must only commit once it is certain that all
other nodes in the transaction are also going to commit.
A transaction commit must be irrevocable—you are not allowed to change your
mind and retroactively abort a transaction after it has been committed. The reason
for this rule is that once data has been committed, it becomes visible to other transac‐
tions, and thus other clients may start relying on that data; this principle forms the
basis of read committed isolation, discussed in “Read Committed” on page 234. If a
transaction was allowed to abort after committing, any transactions that read the
committed data would be based on data that was retroactively declared not to have
existed—so they would have to be reverted as well.
(It is possible for the effects of a committed transaction to later be undone by
another, compensating transaction [73, 74]. However, from the database’s point of
view this is a separate transaction, and thus any cross-transaction correctness
requirements are the application’s problem.)
Introduction to two-phase commit
Two-phase commit is an algorithm for achieving atomic transaction commit across
multiple nodes—i.e., to ensure that either all nodes commit or all nodes abort. It is a
classic algorithm in distributed databases [13, 35, 75]. 2PC is used internally in some
databases and also made available to applications in the form of XA transactions [76,
77] (which are supported by the Java Transaction API, for example) or via WS-
AtomicTransaction for SOAP web services [78, 79].
The basic flow of 2PC is illustrated in Figure 9-9. Instead of a single commit request,
as with a single-node transaction, the commit/abort process in 2PC is split into two
phases (hence the name).
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 355

Figure 9-9. A successful execution of two-phase commit (2PC).
Don’t confuse 2PC and 2PL
Two-phase commit (2PC) and two-phase locking (see “Two-Phase
Locking (2PL)” on page 257) are two very different things. 2PC
provides atomic commit in a distributed database, whereas 2PL
provides serializable isolation. To avoid confusion, it’s best to think
of them as entirely separate concepts and to ignore the unfortunate
similarity in the names.
2PC uses a new component that does not normally appear in single-node transac‐
tions: a coordinator (also known as transaction manager). The coordinator is often
implemented as a library within the same application process that is requesting the
transaction (e.g., embedded in a Java EE container), but it can also be a separate pro‐
cess or service. Examples of such coordinators include Narayana, JOTM, BTM, or
MSDTC.
A 2PC transaction begins with the application reading and writing data on multiple
database nodes, as normal. We call these database nodes participants in the transac‐
tion. When the application is ready to commit, the coordinator begins phase 1: it
sends a prepare request to each of the nodes, asking them whether they are able to
commit. The coordinator then tracks the responses from the participants:
• If all participants reply “yes,” indicating they are ready to commit, then the coor‐
dinator sends out a commit request in phase 2, and the commit actually takes
place.
• If any of the participants replies “no,” the coordinator sends an abort request to
all nodes in phase 2.
This process is somewhat like the traditional marriage ceremony in Western cultures:
the minister asks the bride and groom individually whether each wants to marry the
other, and typically receives the answer “I do” from both. After receiving both
356 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

acknowledgments, the minister pronounces the couple husband and wife: the trans‐
action is committed, and the happy fact is broadcast to all attendees. If either bride or
groom does not say “yes,” the ceremony is aborted [73].
A system of promises
From this short description it might not be clear why two-phase commit ensures
atomicity, while one-phase commit across several nodes does not. Surely the prepare
and commit requests can just as easily be lost in the two-phase case. What makes 2PC
different?
To understand why it works, we have to break down the process in a bit more detail:
1. When the application wants to begin a distributed transaction, it requests a
transaction ID from the coordinator. This transaction ID is globally unique.
2. The application begins a single-node transaction on each of the participants, and
attaches the globally unique transaction ID to the single-node transaction. All
reads and writes are done in one of these single-node transactions. If anything
goes wrong at this stage (for example, a node crashes or a request times out), the
coordinator or any of the participants can abort.
3. When the application is ready to commit, the coordinator sends a prepare
request to all participants, tagged with the global transaction ID. If any of these
requests fails or times out, the coordinator sends an abort request for that trans‐
action ID to all participants.
4. When a participant receives the prepare request, it makes sure that it can defi‐
nitely commit the transaction under all circumstances. This includes writing all
transaction data to disk (a crash, a power failure, or running out of disk space is
not an acceptable excuse for refusing to commit later), and checking for any con‐
flicts or constraint violations. By replying “yes” to the coordinator, the node
promises to commit the transaction without error if requested. In other words,
the participant surrenders the right to abort the transaction, but without actually
committing it.
5. When the coordinator has received responses to all prepare requests, it makes a
definitive decision on whether to commit or abort the transaction (committing
only if all participants voted “yes”). The coordinator must write that decision to
its transaction log on disk so that it knows which way it decided in case it subse‐
quently crashes. This is called the commit point.
6. Once the coordinator’s decision has been written to disk, the commit or abort
request is sent to all participants. If this request fails or times out, the coordinator
must retry forever until it succeeds. There is no more going back: if the decision
was to commit, that decision must be enforced, no matter how many retries it
takes. If a participant has crashed in the meantime, the transaction will be com‐
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 357

mitted when it recovers—since the participant voted “yes,” it cannot refuse to
commit when it recovers.
Thus, the protocol contains two crucial “points of no return”: when a participant
votes “yes,” it promises that it will definitely be able to commit later (although the
coordinator may still choose to abort); and once the coordinator decides, that deci‐
sion is irrevocable. Those promises ensure the atomicity of 2PC. (Single-node atomic
commit lumps these two events into one: writing the commit record to the transac‐
tion log.)
Returning to the marriage analogy, before saying “I do,” you and your bride/groom
have the freedom to abort the transaction by saying “No way!” (or something to that
effect). However, after saying “I do,” you cannot retract that statement. If you faint
after saying “I do” and you don’t hear the minister speak the words “You are now
husband and wife,” that doesn’t change the fact that the transaction was committed.
When you recover consciousness later, you can find out whether you are married or
not by querying the minister for the status of your global transaction ID, or you can
wait for the minister’s next retry of the commit request (since the retries will have
continued throughout your period of unconsciousness).
Coordinator failure
We have discussed what happens if one of the participants or the network fails during
2PC: if any of the prepare requests fail or time out, the coordinator aborts the trans‐
action; if any of the commit or abort requests fail, the coordinator retries them indefi‐
nitely. However, it is less clear what happens if the coordinator crashes.
If the coordinator fails before sending the prepare requests, a participant can safely
abort the transaction. But once the participant has received a prepare request and
voted “yes,” it can no longer abort unilaterally—it must wait to hear back from the
coordinator whether the transaction was committed or aborted. If the coordinator
crashes or the network fails at this point, the participant can do nothing but wait. A
participant’s transaction in this state is called in doubt or uncertain.
The situation is illustrated in Figure 9-10. In this particular example, the coordinator
actually decided to commit, and database 2 received the commit request. However,
the coordinator crashed before it could send the commit request to database 1, and so
database 1 does not know whether to commit or abort. Even a timeout does not help
here: if database 1 unilaterally aborts after a timeout, it will end up inconsistent with
database 2, which has committed. Similarly, it is not safe to unilaterally commit,
because another participant may have aborted.
358 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Figure 9-10. The coordinator crashes after participants vote “yes.” Database 1 does not
know whether to commit or abort.
Without hearing from the coordinator, the participant has no way of knowing
whether to commit or abort. In principle, the participants could communicate among
themselves to find out how each participant voted and come to some agreement, but
that is not part of the 2PC protocol.
The only way 2PC can complete is by waiting for the coordinator to recover. This is
why the coordinator must write its commit or abort decision to a transaction log on
disk before sending commit or abort requests to participants: when the coordinator
recovers, it determines the status of all in-doubt transactions by reading its transac‐
tion log. Any transactions that don’t have a commit record in the coordinator’s log
are aborted. Thus, the commit point of 2PC comes down to a regular single-node
atomic commit on the coordinator.
Three-phase commit
Two-phase commit is called a blocking atomic commit protocol due to the fact that
2PC can become stuck waiting for the coordinator to recover. In theory, it is possible
to make an atomic commit protocol nonblocking, so that it does not get stuck if a
node fails. However, making this work in practice is not so straightforward.
As an alternative to 2PC, an algorithm called three-phase commit (3PC) has been pro‐
posed [13, 80]. However, 3PC assumes a network with bounded delay and nodes with
bounded response times; in most practical systems with unbounded network delay
and process pauses (see Chapter 8), it cannot guarantee atomicity.
In general, nonblocking atomic commit requires a perfect failure detector [67, 71]—
i.e., a reliable mechanism for telling whether a node has crashed or not. In a network
with unbounded delay a timeout is not a reliable failure detector, because a request
may time out due to a network problem even if no node has crashed. For this reason,
2PC continues to be used, despite the known problem with coordinator failure.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 359

Distributed Transactions in Practice
Distributed transactions, especially those implemented with two-phase commit, have
a mixed reputation. On the one hand, they are seen as providing an important safety
guarantee that would be hard to achieve otherwise; on the other hand, they are criti‐
cized for causing operational problems, killing performance, and promising more
than they can deliver [81, 82, 83, 84]. Many cloud services choose not to implement
distributed transactions due to the operational problems they engender [85, 86].
Some implementations of distributed transactions carry a heavy performance penalty
—for example, distributed transactions in MySQL are reported to be over 10 times
slower than single-node transactions [87], so it is not surprising when people advise
against using them. Much of the performance cost inherent in two-phase commit is
due to the additional disk forcing (fsync) that is required for crash recovery [88], and
the additional network round-trips.
However, rather than dismissing distributed transactions outright, we should exam‐
ine them in some more detail, because there are important lessons to be learned from
them. To begin, we should be precise about what we mean by “distributed transac‐
tions.” Two quite different types of distributed transactions are often conflated:
Database-internal distributed transactions
Some distributed databases (i.e., databases that use replication and partitioning
in their standard configuration) support internal transactions among the nodes
of that database. For example, VoltDB and MySQL Cluster’s NDB storage engine
have such internal transaction support. In this case, all the nodes participating in
the transaction are running the same database software.
Heterogeneous distributed transactions
In a heterogeneous transaction, the participants are two or more different tech‐
nologies: for example, two databases from different vendors, or even non-
database systems such as message brokers. A distributed transaction across these
systems must ensure atomic commit, even though the systems may be entirely
different under the hood.
Database-internal transactions do not have to be compatible with any other system,
so they can use any protocol and apply optimizations specific to that particular tech‐
nology. For that reason, database-internal distributed transactions can often work
quite well. On the other hand, transactions spanning heterogeneous technologies are
a lot more challenging.
Exactly-once message processing
Heterogeneous distributed transactions allow diverse systems to be integrated in
powerful ways. For example, a message from a message queue can be acknowledged
as processed if and only if the database transaction for processing the message was
360 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

successfully committed. This is implemented by atomically committing the message
acknowledgment and the database writes in a single transaction. With distributed
transaction support, this is possible, even if the message broker and the database are
two unrelated technologies running on different machines.
If either the message delivery or the database transaction fails, both are aborted, and
so the message broker may safely redeliver the message later. Thus, by atomically
committing the message and the side effects of its processing, we can ensure that the
message is effectively processed exactly once, even if it required a few retries before it
succeeded. The abort discards any side effects of the partially completed transaction.
Such a distributed transaction is only possible if all systems affected by the transac‐
tion are able to use the same atomic commit protocol, however. For example, say a
side effect of processing a message is to send an email, and the email server does not
support two-phase commit: it could happen that the email is sent two or more times
if message processing fails and is retried. But if all side effects of processing a message
are rolled back on transaction abort, then the processing step can safely be retried as
if nothing had happened.
We will return to the topic of exactly-once message processing in Chapter 11. Let’s
look first at the atomic commit protocol that allows such heterogeneous distributed
transactions.
XA transactions
X/Open XA (short for eXtended Architecture) is a standard for implementing two-
phase commit across heterogeneous technologies [76, 77]. It was introduced in 1991
and has been widely implemented: XA is supported by many traditional relational
databases (including PostgreSQL, MySQL, DB2, SQL Server, and Oracle) and mes‐
sage brokers (including ActiveMQ, HornetQ, MSMQ, and IBM MQ).
XA is not a network protocol—it is merely a C API for interfacing with a transaction
coordinator. Bindings for this API exist in other languages; for example, in the world
of Java EE applications, XA transactions are implemented using the Java Transaction
API (JTA), which in turn is supported by many drivers for databases using Java Data‐
base Connectivity (JDBC) and drivers for message brokers using the Java Message
Service (JMS) APIs.
XA assumes that your application uses a network driver or client library to commu‐
nicate with the participant databases or messaging services. If the driver supports XA,
that means it calls the XA API to find out whether an operation should be part of a
distributed transaction—and if so, it sends the necessary information to the database
server. The driver also exposes callbacks through which the coordinator can ask the
participant to prepare, commit, or abort.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 361

The transaction coordinator implements the XA API. The standard does not specify
how it should be implemented, but in practice the coordinator is often simply a
library that is loaded into the same process as the application issuing the transaction
(not a separate service). It keeps track of the participants in a transaction, collects
partipants’ responses after asking them to prepare (via a callback into the driver), and
uses a log on the local disk to keep track of the commit/abort decision for each trans‐
action.
If the application process crashes, or the machine on which the application is running
dies, the coordinator goes with it. Any participants with prepared but uncommitted
transactions are then stuck in doubt. Since the coordinator’s log is on the application
server’s local disk, that server must be restarted, and the coordinator library must
read the log to recover the commit/abort outcome of each transaction. Only then can
the coordinator use the database driver’s XA callbacks to ask participants to commit
or abort, as appropriate. The database server cannot contact the coordinator directly,
since all communication must go via its client library.
Holding locks while in doubt
Why do we care so much about a transaction being stuck in doubt? Can’t the rest of
the system just get on with its work, and ignore the in-doubt transaction that will be
cleaned up eventually?
The problem is with locking. As discussed in “Read Committed” on page 234, data‐
base transactions usually take a row-level exclusive lock on any rows they modify, to
prevent dirty writes. In addition, if you want serializable isolation, a database using
two-phase locking would also have to take a shared lock on any rows read by the
transaction (see “Two-Phase Locking (2PL)” on page 257).
The database cannot release those locks until the transaction commits or aborts
(illustrated as a shaded area in Figure 9-9). Therefore, when using two-phase commit,
a transaction must hold onto the locks throughout the time it is in doubt. If the coor‐
dinator has crashed and takes 20 minutes to start up again, those locks will be held
for 20 minutes. If the coordinator’s log is entirely lost for some reason, those locks
will be held forever—or at least until the situation is manually resolved by an admin‐
istrator.
While those locks are held, no other transaction can modify those rows. Depending
on the database, other transactions may even be blocked from reading those rows.
Thus, other transactions cannot simply continue with their business—if they want to
access that same data, they will be blocked. This can cause large parts of your applica‐
tion to become unavailable until the in-doubt transaction is resolved.
362 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Recovering from coordinator failure
In theory, if the coordinator crashes and is restarted, it should cleanly recover its state
from the log and resolve any in-doubt transactions. However, in practice, orphaned
in-doubt transactions do occur [89, 90]—that is, transactions for which the coordina‐
tor cannot decide the outcome for whatever reason (e.g., because the transaction log
has been lost or corrupted due to a software bug). These transactions cannot be
resolved automatically, so they sit forever in the database, holding locks and blocking
other transactions.
Even rebooting your database servers will not fix this problem, since a correct imple‐
mentation of 2PC must preserve the locks of an in-doubt transaction even across
restarts (otherwise it would risk violating the atomicity guarantee). It’s a sticky
situation.
The only way out is for an administrator to manually decide whether to commit or
roll back the transactions. The administrator must examine the participants of each
in-doubt transaction, determine whether any participant has committed or aborted
already, and then apply the same outcome to the other participants. Resolving the
problem potentially requires a lot of manual effort, and most likely needs to be done
under high stress and time pressure during a serious production outage (otherwise,
why would the coordinator be in such a bad state?).
Many XA implementations have an emergency escape hatch called heuristic decisions:
allowing a participant to unilaterally decide to abort or commit an in-doubt transac‐
tion without a definitive decision from the coordinator [76, 77, 91]. To be clear, heu‐
ristic here is a euphemism for probably breaking atomicity, since it violates the system
of promises in two-phase commit. Thus, heuristic decisions are intended only for
getting out of catastrophic situations, and not for regular use.
Limitations of distributed transactions
XA transactions solve the real and important problem of keeping several participant
data systems consistent with each other, but as we have seen, they also introduce
major operational problems. In particular, the key realization is that the transaction
coordinator is itself a kind of database (in which transaction outcomes are stored),
and so it needs to be approached with the same care as any other important database:
• If the coordinator is not replicated but runs only on a single machine, it is a sin‐
gle point of failure for the entire system (since its failure causes other application
servers to block on locks held by in-doubt transactions). Surprisingly, many
coordinator implementations are not highly available by default, or have only
rudimentary replication support.
• Many server-side applications are developed in a stateless model (as favored by
HTTP), with all persistent state stored in a database, which has the advantage
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 363

that application servers can be added and removed at will. However, when the
coordinator is part of the application server, it changes the nature of the deploy‐
ment. Suddenly, the coordinator’s logs become a crucial part of the durable sys‐
tem state—as important as the databases themselves, since the coordinator logs
are required in order to recover in-doubt transactions after a crash. Such applica‐
tion servers are no longer stateless.
• Since XA needs to be compatible with a wide range of data systems, it is necessar‐
ily a lowest common denominator. For example, it cannot detect deadlocks
across different systems (since that would require a standardized protocol for
systems to exchange information on the locks that each transaction is waiting
for), and it does not work with SSI (see “Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)” on
page 261), since that would require a protocol for identifying conflicts across dif‐
ferent systems.
• For database-internal distributed transactions (not XA), the limitations are not
so great—for example, a distributed version of SSI is possible. However, there
remains the problem that for 2PC to successfully commit a transaction, all par‐
ticipants must respond. Consequently, if any part of the system is broken, the
transaction also fails. Distributed transactions thus have a tendency of amplifying
failures, which runs counter to our goal of building fault-tolerant systems.
Do these facts mean we should give up all hope of keeping several systems consistent
with each other? Not quite—there are alternative methods that allow us to achieve
the same thing without the pain of heterogeneous distributed transactions. We will
return to these in Chapters 11 and 12. But first, we should wrap up the topic of
consensus.
Fault-Tolerant Consensus
Informally, consensus means getting several nodes to agree on something. For exam‐
ple, if several people concurrently try to book the last seat on an airplane, or the same
seat in a theater, or try to register an account with the same username, then a consen‐
sus algorithm could be used to determine which one of these mutually incompatible
operations should be the winner.
The consensus problem is normally formalized as follows: one or more nodes may
propose values, and the consensus algorithm decides on one of those values. In the
seat-booking example, when several customers are concurrently trying to buy the last
seat, each node handling a customer request may propose the ID of the customer it is
serving, and the decision indicates which one of those customers got the seat.
364 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

In this formalism, a consensus algorithm must satisfy the following properties [25]:xiii
Uniform agreement
No two nodes decide differently.
Integrity
No node decides twice.
Validity
If a node decides value v, then v was proposed by some node.
Termination
Every node that does not crash eventually decides some value.
The uniform agreement and integrity properties define the core idea of consensus:
everyone decides on the same outcome, and once you have decided, you cannot
change your mind. The validity property exists mostly to rule out trivial solutions: for
example, you could have an algorithm that always decides null, no matter what was
proposed; this algorithm would satisfy the agreement and integrity properties, but
not the validity property.
If you don’t care about fault tolerance, then satisfying the first three properties is
easy: you can just hardcode one node to be the “dictator,” and let that node make all
of the decisions. However, if that one node fails, then the system can no longer make
any decisions. This is, in fact, what we saw in the case of two-phase commit: if the
coordinator fails, in-doubt participants cannot decide whether to commit or abort.
The termination property formalizes the idea of fault tolerance. It essentially says that
a consensus algorithm cannot simply sit around and do nothing forever—in other
words, it must make progress. Even if some nodes fail, the other nodes must still
reach a decision. (Termination is a liveness property, whereas the other three are
safety properties—see “Safety and liveness” on page 308.)
The system model of consensus assumes that when a node “crashes,” it suddenly dis‐
appears and never comes back. (Instead of a software crash, imagine that there is an
earthquake, and the datacenter containing your node is destroyed by a landslide. You
must assume that your node is buried under 30 feet of mud and is never going to
come back online.) In this system model, any algorithm that has to wait for a node to
recover is not going to be able to satisfy the termination property. In particular, 2PC
does not meet the requirements for termination.
xiii. This particular variant of consensus is called uniform consensus, which is equivalent to regular consensus
in asynchronous systems with unreliable failure detectors [71]. The academic literature usually refers to pro‐
cesses rather than nodes, but we use nodes here for consistency with the rest of this book.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 365

Of course, if all nodes crash and none of them are running, then it is not possible for
any algorithm to decide anything. There is a limit to the number of failures that an
algorithm can tolerate: in fact, it can be proved that any consensus algorithm requires
at least a majority of nodes to be functioning correctly in order to assure termination
[67]. That majority can safely form a quorum (see “Quorums for reading and writ‐
ing” on page 179).
Thus, the termination property is subject to the assumption that fewer than half of
the nodes are crashed or unreachable. However, most implementations of consensus
ensure that the safety properties—agreement, integrity, and validity—are always met,
even if a majority of nodes fail or there is a severe network problem [92]. Thus, a
large-scale outage can stop the system from being able to process requests, but it can‐
not corrupt the consensus system by causing it to make invalid decisions.
Most consensus algorithms assume that there are no Byzantine faults, as discussed in
“Byzantine Faults” on page 304. That is, if a node does not correctly follow the proto‐
col (for example, if it sends contradictory messages to different nodes), it may break
the safety properties of the protocol. It is possible to make consensus robust against
Byzantine faults as long as fewer than one-third of the nodes are Byzantine-faulty [25,
93], but we don’t have space to discuss those algorithms in detail in this book.
Consensus algorithms and total order broadcast
The best-known fault-tolerant consensus algorithms are Viewstamped Replication
(VSR) [94, 95], Paxos [96, 97, 98, 99], Raft [22, 100, 101], and Zab [15, 21, 102]. There
are quite a few similarities between these algorithms, but they are not the same [103].
In this book we won’t go into full details of the different algorithms: it’s sufficient to
be aware of some of the high-level ideas that they have in common, unless you’re
implementing a consensus system yourself (which is probably not advisable—it’s
hard [98, 104]).
Most of these algorithms actually don’t directly use the formal model described here
(proposing and deciding on a single value, while satisfying the agreement, integrity,
validity, and termination properties). Instead, they decide on a sequence of values,
which makes them total order broadcast algorithms, as discussed previously in this
chapter (see “Total Order Broadcast” on page 348).
Remember that total order broadcast requires messages to be delivered exactly once,
in the same order, to all nodes. If you think about it, this is equivalent to performing
several rounds of consensus: in each round, nodes propose the message that they
want to send next, and then decide on the next message to be delivered in the total
order [67].
So, total order broadcast is equivalent to repeated rounds of consensus (each consen‐
sus decision corresponding to one message delivery):
366 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

• Due to the agreement property of consensus, all nodes decide to deliver the same
messages in the same order.
• Due to the integrity property, messages are not duplicated.
• Due to the validity property, messages are not corrupted and not fabricated out
of thin air.
• Due to the termination property, messages are not lost.
Viewstamped Replication, Raft, and Zab implement total order broadcast directly,
because that is more efficient than doing repeated rounds of one-value-at-a-time
consensus. In the case of Paxos, this optimization is known as Multi-Paxos.
Single-leader replication and consensus
In Chapter 5 we discussed single-leader replication (see “Leaders and Followers” on
page 152), which takes all the writes to the leader and applies them to the followers in
the same order, thus keeping replicas up to date. Isn’t this essentially total order
broadcast? How come we didn’t have to worry about consensus in Chapter 5?
The answer comes down to how the leader is chosen. If the leader is manually chosen
and configured by the humans in your operations team, you essentially have a “con‐
sensus algorithm” of the dictatorial variety: only one node is allowed to accept writes
(i.e., make decisions about the order of writes in the replication log), and if that node
goes down, the system becomes unavailable for writes until the operators manually
configure a different node to be the leader. Such a system can work well in practice,
but it does not satisfy the termination property of consensus because it requires
human intervention in order to make progress.
Some databases perform automatic leader election and failover, promoting a follower
to be the new leader if the old leader fails (see “Handling Node Outages” on page
156). This brings us closer to fault-tolerant total order broadcast, and thus to solving
consensus.
However, there is a problem. We previously discussed the problem of split brain, and
said that all nodes need to agree who the leader is—otherwise two different nodes
could each believe themselves to be the leader, and consequently get the database into
an inconsistent state. Thus, we need consensus in order to elect a leader. But if the
consensus algorithms described here are actually total order broadcast algorithms,
and total order broadcast is like single-leader replication, and single-leader replica‐
tion requires a leader, then…
It seems that in order to elect a leader, we first need a leader. In order to solve con‐
sensus, we must first solve consensus. How do we break out of this conundrum?
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 367

Epoch numbering and quorums
All of the consensus protocols discussed so far internally use a leader in some form or
another, but they don’t guarantee that the leader is unique. Instead, they can make a
weaker guarantee: the protocols define an epoch number (called the ballot number in
Paxos, view number in Viewstamped Replication, and term number in Raft) and
guarantee that within each epoch, the leader is unique.
Every time the current leader is thought to be dead, a vote is started among the nodes
to elect a new leader. This election is given an incremented epoch number, and thus
epoch numbers are totally ordered and monotonically increasing. If there is a conflict
between two different leaders in two different epochs (perhaps because the previous
leader actually wasn’t dead after all), then the leader with the higher epoch number
prevails.
Before a leader is allowed to decide anything, it must first check that there isn’t some
other leader with a higher epoch number which might take a conflicting decision.
How does a leader know that it hasn’t been ousted by another node? Recall “The
Truth Is Defined by the Majority” on page 300: a node cannot necessarily trust its
own judgment—just because a node thinks that it is the leader, that does not neces‐
sarily mean the other nodes accept it as their leader.
Instead, it must collect votes from a quorum of nodes (see “Quorums for reading and
writing” on page 179). For every decision that a leader wants to make, it must send
the proposed value to the other nodes and wait for a quorum of nodes to respond in
favor of the proposal. The quorum typically, but not always, consists of a majority of
nodes [105]. A node votes in favor of a proposal only if it is not aware of any other
leader with a higher epoch.
Thus, we have two rounds of voting: once to choose a leader, and a second time to
vote on a leader’s proposal. The key insight is that the quorums for those two votes
must overlap: if a vote on a proposal succeeds, at least one of the nodes that voted for
it must have also participated in the most recent leader election [105]. Thus, if the
vote on a proposal does not reveal any higher-numbered epoch, the current leader
can conclude that no leader election with a higher epoch number has happened, and
therefore be sure that it still holds the leadership. It can then safely decide the pro‐
posed value.
This voting process looks superficially similar to two-phase commit. The biggest dif‐
ferences are that in 2PC the coordinator is not elected, and that fault-tolerant consen‐
sus algorithms only require votes from a majority of nodes, whereas 2PC requires a
“yes” vote from every participant. Moreover, consensus algorithms define a recovery
process by which nodes can get into a consistent state after a new leader is elected,
ensuring that the safety properties are always met. These differences are key to the
correctness and fault tolerance of a consensus algorithm.
368 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Limitations of consensus
Consensus algorithms are a huge breakthrough for distributed systems: they bring
concrete safety properties (agreement, integrity, and validity) to systems where every‐
thing else is uncertain, and they nevertheless remain fault-tolerant (able to make pro‐
gress as long as a majority of nodes are working and reachable). They provide total
order broadcast, and therefore they can also implement linearizable atomic opera‐
tions in a fault-tolerant way (see “Implementing linearizable storage using total order
broadcast” on page 350).
Nevertheless, they are not used everywhere, because the benefits come at a cost.
The process by which nodes vote on proposals before they are decided is a kind of
synchronous replication. As discussed in “Synchronous Versus Asynchronous Repli‐
cation” on page 153, databases are often configured to use asynchronous replication.
In this configuration, some committed data can potentially be lost on failover—but
many people choose to accept this risk for the sake of better performance.
Consensus systems always require a strict majority to operate. This means you need a
minimum of three nodes in order to tolerate one failure (the remaining two out of
three form a majority), or a minimum of five nodes to tolerate two failures (the
remaining three out of five form a majority). If a network failure cuts off some nodes
from the rest, only the majority portion of the network can make progress, and the
rest is blocked (see also “The Cost of Linearizability” on page 335).
Most consensus algorithms assume a fixed set of nodes that participate in voting,
which means that you can’t just add or remove nodes in the cluster. Dynamic mem‐
bership extensions to consensus algorithms allow the set of nodes in the cluster to
change over time, but they are much less well understood than static membership
algorithms.
Consensus systems generally rely on timeouts to detect failed nodes. In environments
with highly variable network delays, especially geographically distributed systems, it
often happens that a node falsely believes the leader to have failed due to a transient
network issue. Although this error does not harm the safety properties, frequent
leader elections result in terrible performance because the system can end up spend‐
ing more time choosing a leader than doing any useful work.
Sometimes, consensus algorithms are particularly sensitive to network problems. For
example, Raft has been shown to have unpleasant edge cases [106]: if the entire net‐
work is working correctly except for one particular network link that is consistently
unreliable, Raft can get into situations where leadership continually bounces between
two nodes, or the current leader is continually forced to resign, so the system effec‐
tively never makes progress. Other consensus algorithms have similar problems, and
designing algorithms that are more robust to unreliable networks is still an open
research problem.
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 369

Membership and Coordination Services
Projects like ZooKeeper or etcd are often described as “distributed key-value stores”
or “coordination and configuration services.” The API of such a service looks pretty
much like that of a database: you can read and write the value for a given key, and
iterate over keys. So if they’re basically databases, why do they go to all the effort of
implementing a consensus algorithm? What makes them different from any other
kind of database?
To understand this, it is helpful to briefly explore how a service like ZooKeeper is
used. As an application developer, you will rarely need to use ZooKeeper directly,
because it is actually not well suited as a general-purpose database. It is more likely
that you will end up relying on it indirectly via some other project: for example,
HBase, Hadoop YARN, OpenStack Nova, and Kafka all rely on ZooKeeper running
in the background. What is it that these projects get from it?
ZooKeeper and etcd are designed to hold small amounts of data that can fit entirely
in memory (although they still write to disk for durability)—so you wouldn’t want to
store all of your application’s data here. That small amount of data is replicated
across all the nodes using a fault-tolerant total order broadcast algorithm. As dis‐
cussed previously, total order broadcast is just what you need for database replica‐
tion: if each message represents a write to the database, applying the same writes in
the same order keeps replicas consistent with each other.
ZooKeeper is modeled after Google’s Chubby lock service [14, 98], implementing not
only total order broadcast (and hence consensus), but also an interesting set of other
features that turn out to be particularly useful when building distributed systems:
Linearizable atomic operations
Using an atomic compare-and-set operation, you can implement a lock: if several
nodes concurrently try to perform the same operation, only one of them will suc‐
ceed. The consensus protocol guarantees that the operation will be atomic and
linearizable, even if a node fails or the network is interrupted at any point. A dis‐
tributed lock is usually implemented as a lease, which has an expiry time so that
it is eventually released in case the client fails (see “Process Pauses” on page 295).
Total ordering of operations
As discussed in “The leader and the lock” on page 301, when some resource is
protected by a lock or lease, you need a fencing token to prevent clients from con‐
flicting with each other in the case of a process pause. The fencing token is some
number that monotonically increases every time the lock is acquired. ZooKeeper
provides this by totally ordering all operations and giving each operation a
monotonically increasing transaction ID (zxid) and version number (cversion)
[15].
370 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Failure detection
Clients maintain a long-lived session on ZooKeeper servers, and the client and
server periodically exchange heartbeats to check that the other node is still alive.
Even if the connection is temporarily interrupted, or a ZooKeeper node fails, the
session remains active. However, if the heartbeats cease for a duration that is
longer than the session timeout, ZooKeeper declares the session to be dead. Any
locks held by a session can be configured to be automatically released when the
session times out (ZooKeeper calls these ephemeral nodes).
Change notifications
Not only can one client read locks and values that were created by another client,
but it can also watch them for changes. Thus, a client can find out when another
client joins the cluster (based on the value it writes to ZooKeeper), or if another
client fails (because its session times out and its ephemeral nodes disappear). By
subscribing to notifications, a client avoids having to frequently poll to find out
about changes.
Of these features, only the linearizable atomic operations really require consensus.
However, it is the combination of these features that makes systems like ZooKeeper
so useful for distributed coordination.
Allocating work to nodes
One example in which the ZooKeeper/Chubby model works well is if you have sev‐
eral instances of a process or service, and one of them needs to be chosen as leader or
primary. If the leader fails, one of the other nodes should take over. This is of course
useful for single-leader databases, but it’s also useful for job schedulers and similar
stateful systems.
Another example arises when you have some partitioned resource (database, message
streams, file storage, distributed actor system, etc.) and need to decide which parti‐
tion to assign to which node. As new nodes join the cluster, some of the partitions
need to be moved from existing nodes to the new nodes in order to rebalance the
load (see “Rebalancing Partitions” on page 209). As nodes are removed or fail, other
nodes need to take over the failed nodes’ work.
These kinds of tasks can be achieved by judicious use of atomic operations, ephem‐
eral nodes, and notifications in ZooKeeper. If done correctly, this approach allows
the application to automatically recover from faults without human intervention. It’s
not easy, despite the appearance of libraries such as Apache Curator [17] that have
sprung up to provide higher-level tools on top of the ZooKeeper client API—but it is
still much better than attempting to implement the necessary consensus algorithms
from scratch, which has a poor success record [107].
Distributed Transactions and Consensus | 371

An application may initially run only on a single node, but eventually may grow to
thousands of nodes. Trying to perform majority votes over so many nodes would be
terribly inefficient. Instead, ZooKeeper runs on a fixed number of nodes (usually
three or five) and performs its majority votes among those nodes while supporting a
potentially large number of clients. Thus, ZooKeeper provides a way of “outsourcing”
some of the work of coordinating nodes (consensus, operation ordering, and failure
detection) to an external service.
Normally, the kind of data managed by ZooKeeper is quite slow-changing: it repre‐
sents information like “the node running on 10.1.1.23 is the leader for partition 7,”
which may change on a timescale of minutes or hours. It is not intended for storing
the runtime state of the application, which may change thousands or even millions of
times per second. If application state needs to be replicated from one node to
another, other tools (such as Apache BookKeeper [108]) can be used.
Service discovery
ZooKeeper, etcd, and Consul are also often used for service discovery—that is, to find
out which IP address you need to connect to in order to reach a particular service. In
cloud datacenter environments, where it is common for virtual machines to continu‐
ally come and go, you often don’t know the IP addresses of your services ahead of
time. Instead, you can configure your services such that when they start up they reg‐
ister their network endpoints in a service registry, where they can then be found by
other services.
However, it is less clear whether service discovery actually requires consensus. DNS is
the traditional way of looking up the IP address for a service name, and it uses multi‐
ple layers of caching to achieve good performance and availability. Reads from DNS
are absolutely not linearizable, and it is usually not considered problematic if the
results from a DNS query are a little stale [109]. It is more important that DNS is reli‐
ably available and robust to network interruptions.
Although service discovery does not require consensus, leader election does. Thus, if
your consensus system already knows who the leader is, then it can make sense to
also use that information to help other services discover who the leader is. For this
purpose, some consensus systems support read-only caching replicas. These replicas
asynchronously receive the log of all decisions of the consensus algorithm, but do not
actively participate in voting. They are therefore able to serve read requests that do
not need to be linearizable.
Membership services
ZooKeeper and friends can be seen as part of a long history of research into member‐
ship services, which goes back to the 1980s and has been important for building
highly reliable systems, e.g., for air traffic control [110].
372 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

A membership service determines which nodes are currently active and live members
of a cluster. As we saw throughout Chapter 8, due to unbounded network delays it’s
not possible to reliably detect whether another node has failed. However, if you cou‐
ple failure detection with consensus, nodes can come to an agreement about which
nodes should be considered alive or not.
It could still happen that a node is incorrectly declared dead by consensus, even
though it is actually alive. But it is nevertheless very useful for a system to have agree‐
ment on which nodes constitute the current membership. For example, choosing a
leader could mean simply choosing the lowest-numbered among the current mem‐
bers, but this approach would not work if different nodes have divergent opinions on
who the current members are.
Summary
In this chapter we examined the topics of consistency and consensus from several dif‐
ferent angles. We looked in depth at linearizability, a popular consistency model: its
goal is to make replicated data appear as though there were only a single copy, and to
make all operations act on it atomically. Although linearizability is appealing because
it is easy to understand—it makes a database behave like a variable in a single-
threaded program—it has the downside of being slow, especially in environments
with large network delays.
We also explored causality, which imposes an ordering on events in a system (what
happened before what, based on cause and effect). Unlike linearizability, which puts
all operations in a single, totally ordered timeline, causality provides us with a weaker
consistency model: some things can be concurrent, so the version history is like a
timeline with branching and merging. Causal consistency does not have the coordi‐
nation overhead of linearizability and is much less sensitive to network problems.
However, even if we capture the causal ordering (for example using Lamport time‐
stamps), we saw that some things cannot be implemented this way: in “Timestamp
ordering is not sufficient” on page 347 we considered the example of ensuring that a
username is unique and rejecting concurrent registrations for the same username. If
one node is going to accept a registration, it needs to somehow know that another
node isn’t concurrently in the process of registering the same name. This problem led
us toward consensus.
We saw that achieving consensus means deciding something in such a way that all
nodes agree on what was decided, and such that the decision is irrevocable. With
some digging, it turns out that a wide range of problems are actually reducible to
consensus and are equivalent to each other (in the sense that if you have a solution
for one of them, you can easily transform it into a solution for one of the others).
Such equivalent problems include:
Summary | 373

Linearizable compare-and-set registers
The register needs to atomically decide whether to set its value, based on whether
its current value equals the parameter given in the operation.
Atomic transaction commit
A database must decide whether to commit or abort a distributed transaction.
Total order broadcast
The messaging system must decide on the order in which to deliver messages.
Locks and leases
When several clients are racing to grab a lock or lease, the lock decides which one
successfully acquired it.
Membership/coordination service
Given a failure detector (e.g., timeouts), the system must decide which nodes are
alive, and which should be considered dead because their sessions timed out.
Uniqueness constraint
When several transactions concurrently try to create conflicting records with the
same key, the constraint must decide which one to allow and which should fail
with a constraint violation.
All of these are straightforward if you only have a single node, or if you are willing to
assign the decision-making capability to a single node. This is what happens in a
single-leader database: all the power to make decisions is vested in the leader, which
is why such databases are able to provide linearizable operations, uniqueness con‐
straints, a totally ordered replication log, and more.
However, if that single leader fails, or if a network interruption makes the leader
unreachable, such a system becomes unable to make any progress. There are three
ways of handling that situation:
1. Wait for the leader to recover, and accept that the system will be blocked in the
meantime. Many XA/JTA transaction coordinators choose this option. This
approach does not fully solve consensus because it does not satisfy the termina‐
tion property: if the leader does not recover, the system can be blocked forever.
2. Manually fail over by getting humans to choose a new leader node and reconfig‐
ure the system to use it. Many relational databases take this approach. It is a kind
of consensus by “act of God”—the human operator, outside of the computer sys‐
tem, makes the decision. The speed of failover is limited by the speed at which
humans can act, which is generally slower than computers.
374 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

3. Use an algorithm to automatically choose a new leader. This approach requires a
consensus algorithm, and it is advisable to use a proven algorithm that correctly
handles adverse network conditions [107].
Although a single-leader database can provide linearizability without executing a
consensus algorithm on every write, it still requires consensus to maintain its leader‐
ship and for leadership changes. Thus, in some sense, having a leader only “kicks the
can down the road”: consensus is still required, only in a different place, and less fre‐
quently. The good news is that fault-tolerant algorithms and systems for consensus
exist, and we briefly discussed them in this chapter.
Tools like ZooKeeper play an important role in providing an “outsourced” consen‐
sus, failure detection, and membership service that applications can use. It’s not easy
to use, but it is much better than trying to develop your own algorithms that can
withstand all the problems discussed in Chapter 8. If you find yourself wanting to do
one of those things that is reducible to consensus, and you want it to be fault-tolerant,
then it is advisable to use something like ZooKeeper.
Nevertheless, not every system necessarily requires consensus: for example, leaderless
and multi-leader replication systems typically do not use global consensus. The con‐
flicts that occur in these systems (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171) are a
consequence of not having consensus across different leaders, but maybe that’s okay:
maybe we simply need to cope without linearizability and learn to work better with
data that has branching and merging version histories.
This chapter referenced a large body of research on the theory of distributed systems.
Although the theoretical papers and proofs are not always easy to understand, and
sometimes make unrealistic assumptions, they are incredibly valuable for informing
practical work in this field: they help us reason about what can and cannot be done,
and help us find the counterintuitive ways in which distributed systems are often
flawed. If you have the time, the references are well worth exploring.
This brings us to the end of Part II of this book, in which we covered replication
(Chapter 5), partitioning (Chapter 6), transactions (Chapter 7), distributed system
failure models (Chapter 8), and finally consistency and consensus (Chapter 9). Now
that we have laid a firm foundation of theory, in Part III we will turn once again to
more practical systems, and discuss how to build powerful applications from hetero‐
geneous building blocks.
References
[1] Peter Bailis and Ali Ghodsi: “Eventual Consistency Today: Limitations, Exten‐
sions, and Beyond,” ACM Queue, volume 11, number 3, pages 55-63, March 2013.
doi:10.1145/2460276.2462076
Summary | 375

[2] Prince Mahajan, Lorenzo Alvisi, and Mike Dahlin: “Consistency, Availability, and
Convergence,” University of Texas at Austin, Department of Computer Science, Tech
Report UTCS TR-11-22, May 2011.
[3] Alex Scotti: “Adventures in Building Your Own Database,” at All Your Base,
November 2015.
[4] Peter Bailis, Aaron Davidson, Alan Fekete, et al.: “Highly Available Transactions:
Virtues and Limitations,” at 40th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases
(VLDB), September 2014. Extended version published as pre-print arXiv:1302.0309
[cs.DB].
[5] Paolo Viotti and Marko Vukolić: “Consistency in Non-Transactional Distributed
Storage Systems,” arXiv:1512.00168, 12 April 2016.
[6] Maurice P. Herlihy and Jeannette M. Wing: “Linearizability: A Correctness Con‐
dition for Concurrent Objects,” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
Systems (TOPLAS), volume 12, number 3, pages 463–492, July 1990. doi:
10.1145/78969.78972
[7] Leslie Lamport: “On interprocess communication,” Distributed Computing, vol‐
ume 1, number 2, pages 77–101, June 1986. doi:10.1007/BF01786228
[8] David K. Gifford: “Information Storage in a Decentralized Computer System,”
Xerox Palo Alto Research Centers, CSL-81-8, June 1981.
[9] Martin Kleppmann: “Please Stop Calling Databases CP or AP,” martin.klepp‐
mann.com, May 11, 2015.
[10] Kyle Kingsbury: “Call Me Maybe: MongoDB Stale Reads,” aphyr.com, April 20,
2015.
[11] Kyle Kingsbury: “Computational Techniques in Knossos,” aphyr.com, May 17,
2014.
[12] Peter Bailis: “Linearizability Versus Serializability,” bailis.org, September 24,
2014.
[13] Philip A. Bernstein, Vassos Hadzilacos, and Nathan Goodman: Concurrency
Control and Recovery in Database Systems. Addison-Wesley, 1987. ISBN:
978-0-201-10715-9, available online at research.microsoft.com.
[14] Mike Burrows: “The Chubby Lock Service for Loosely-Coupled Distributed Sys‐
tems,” at 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Implementation
(OSDI), November 2006.
[15] Flavio P. Junqueira and Benjamin Reed: ZooKeeper: Distributed Process Coordi‐
nation. O’Reilly Media, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-449-36130-3
[16] “etcd 2.0.12 Documentation,” CoreOS, Inc., 2015.
376 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

[17] “Apache Curator,” Apache Software Foundation, curator.apache.org, 2015.
[18] Morali Vallath: Oracle 10g RAC Grid, Services & Clustering. Elsevier Digital
Press, 2006. ISBN: 978-1-555-58321-7
[19] Peter Bailis, Alan Fekete, Michael J Franklin, et al.: “Coordination-Avoiding
Database Systems,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 8, number 3, pages
185–196, November 2014.
[20] Kyle Kingsbury: “Call Me Maybe: etcd and Consul,” aphyr.com, June 9, 2014.
[21] Flavio P. Junqueira, Benjamin C. Reed, and Marco Serafini: “Zab: High-
Performance Broadcast for Primary-Backup Systems,” at 41st IEEE International
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN), June 2011. doi:10.1109/
DSN.2011.5958223
[22] Diego Ongaro and John K. Ousterhout: “In Search of an Understandable Con‐
sensus Algorithm (Extended Version),” at USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(ATC), June 2014.
[23] Hagit Attiya, Amotz Bar-Noy, and Danny Dolev: “Sharing Memory Robustly in
Message-Passing Systems,” Journal of the ACM, volume 42, number 1, pages 124–
142, January 1995. doi:10.1145/200836.200869
[24] Nancy Lynch and Alex Shvartsman: “Robust Emulation of Shared Memory
Using Dynamic Quorum-Acknowledged Broadcasts,” at 27th Annual International
Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing (FTCS), June 1997. doi:10.1109/FTCS.
1997.614100
[25] Christian Cachin, Rachid Guerraoui, and Luís Rodrigues: Introduction to Relia‐
ble and Secure Distributed Programming, 2nd edition. Springer, 2011. ISBN:
978-3-642-15259-7, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15260-3
[26] Sam Elliott, Mark Allen, and Martin Kleppmann: personal communication,
thread on twitter.com, October 15, 2015.
[27] Niklas Ekström, Mikhail Panchenko, and Jonathan Ellis: “Possible Issue with
Read Repair?,” email thread on cassandra-dev mailing list, October 2012.
[28] Maurice P. Herlihy: “Wait-Free Synchronization,” ACM Transactions on Pro‐
gramming Languages and Systems (TOPLAS), volume 13, number 1, pages 124–149,
January 1991. doi:10.1145/114005.102808
[29] Armando Fox and Eric A. Brewer: “Harvest, Yield, and Scalable Tolerant Sys‐
tems,” at 7th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS), March 1999.
doi:10.1109/HOTOS.1999.798396
Summary | 377

[30] Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch: “Brewer’s Conjecture and the Feasibility of Con‐
sistent, Available, Partition-Tolerant Web Services,” ACM SIGACT News, volume 33,
number 2, pages 51–59, June 2002. doi:10.1145/564585.564601
[31] Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch: “Perspectives on the CAP Theorem,” IEEE Com‐
puter Magazine, volume 45, number 2, pages 30–36, February 2012. doi:10.1109/MC.
2011.389
[32] Eric A. Brewer: “CAP Twelve Years Later: How the ‘Rules’ Have Changed,” IEEE
Computer Magazine, volume 45, number 2, pages 23–29, February 2012. doi:
10.1109/MC.2012.37
[33] Susan B. Davidson, Hector Garcia-Molina, and Dale Skeen: “Consistency in Par‐
titioned Networks,” ACM Computing Surveys, volume 17, number 3, pages 341–370,
September 1985. doi:10.1145/5505.5508
[34] Paul R. Johnson and Robert H. Thomas: “RFC 677: The Maintenance of Dupli‐
cate Databases,” Network Working Group, January 27, 1975.
[35] Bruce G. Lindsay, Patricia Griffiths Selinger, C. Galtieri, et al.: “Notes on Dis‐
tributed Databases,” IBM Research, Research Report RJ2571(33471), July 1979.
[36] Michael J. Fischer and Alan Michael: “Sacrificing Serializability to Attain High
Availability of Data in an Unreliable Network,” at 1st ACM Symposium on Principles
of Database Systems (PODS), March 1982. doi:10.1145/588111.588124
[37] Eric A. Brewer: “NoSQL: Past, Present, Future,” at QCon San Francisco, Novem‐
ber 2012.
[38] Henry Robinson: “CAP Confusion: Problems with ‘Partition Tolerance,’”
blog.cloudera.com, April 26, 2010.
[39] Adrian Cockcroft: “Migrating to Microservices,” at QCon London, March 2014.
[40] Martin Kleppmann: “A Critique of the CAP Theorem,” arXiv:1509.05393, Sep‐
tember 17, 2015.
[41] Nancy A. Lynch: “A Hundred Impossibility Proofs for Distributed Computing,”
at 8th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), August
1989. doi:10.1145/72981.72982
[42] Hagit Attiya, Faith Ellen, and Adam Morrison: “Limitations of Highly-Available
Eventually-Consistent Data Stores,” at ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
Computing (PODC), July 2015. doi:10.1145/2767386.2767419
[43] Peter Sewell, Susmit Sarkar, Scott Owens, et al.: “x86-TSO: A Rigorous and Usa‐
ble Programmer’s Model for x86 Multiprocessors,” Communications of the ACM,
volume 53, number 7, pages 89–97, July 2010. doi:10.1145/1785414.1785443
378 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

[44] Martin Thompson: “Memory Barriers/Fences,” mechanical-
sympathy.blogspot.co.uk, July 24, 2011.
[45] Ulrich Drepper: “What Every Programmer Should Know About Memory,”
akkadia.org, November 21, 2007.
[46] Daniel J. Abadi: “Consistency Tradeoffs in Modern Distributed Database System
Design,” IEEE Computer Magazine, volume 45, number 2, pages 37–42, February
2012. doi:10.1109/MC.2012.33
[47] Hagit Attiya and Jennifer L. Welch: “Sequential Consistency Versus Linearizabil‐
ity,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), volume 12, number 2, pages
91–122, May 1994. doi:10.1145/176575.176576
[48] Mustaque Ahamad, Gil Neiger, James E. Burns, et al.: “Causal Memory: Defini‐
tions, Implementation, and Programming,” Distributed Computing, volume 9, num‐
ber 1, pages 37–49, March 1995. doi:10.1007/BF01784241
[49] Wyatt Lloyd, Michael J. Freedman, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Andersen:
“Stronger Semantics for Low-Latency Geo-Replicated Storage,” at 10th USENIX Sym‐
posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), April 2013.
[50] Marek Zawirski, Annette Bieniusa, Valter Balegas, et al.: “SwiftCloud: Fault-
Tolerant Geo-Replication Integrated All the Way to the Client Machine,” INRIA
Research Report 8347, August 2013.
[51] Peter Bailis, Ali Ghodsi, Joseph M Hellerstein, and Ion Stoica: “Bolt-on Causal
Consistency,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD),
June 2013.
[52] Philippe Ajoux, Nathan Bronson, Sanjeev Kumar, et al.: “Challenges to Adopting
Stronger Consistency at Scale,” at 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operat‐
ing Systems (HotOS), May 2015.
[53] Peter Bailis: “Causality Is Expensive (and What to Do About It),” bailis.org, Feb‐
ruary 5, 2014.
[54] Ricardo Gonçalves, Paulo Sérgio Almeida, Carlos Baquero, and Victor Fonte:
“Concise Server-Wide Causality Management for Eventually Consistent Data Stores,”
at 15th IFIP International Conference on Distributed Applications and Interoperable
Systems (DAIS), June 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-19129-4_6
[55] Rob Conery: “A Better ID Generator for PostgreSQL,” rob.conery.io, May 29,
2014.
[56] Leslie Lamport: “Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed Sys‐
tem,” Communications of the ACM, volume 21, number 7, pages 558–565, July 1978.
doi:10.1145/359545.359563
Summary | 379

[57] Xavier Défago, André Schiper, and Péter Urbán: “Total Order Broadcast and
Multicast Algorithms: Taxonomy and Survey,” ACM Computing Surveys, volume 36,
number 4, pages 372–421, December 2004. doi:10.1145/1041680.1041682
[58] Hagit Attiya and Jennifer Welch: Distributed Computing: Fundamentals, Simula‐
tions and Advanced Topics, 2nd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2004. ISBN:
978-0-471-45324-6, doi:10.1002/0471478210
[59] Mahesh Balakrishnan, Dahlia Malkhi, Vijayan Prabhakaran, et al.: “CORFU: A
Shared Log Design for Flash Clusters,” at 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Sys‐
tems Design and Implementation (NSDI), April 2012.
[60] Fred B. Schneider: “Implementing Fault-Tolerant Services Using the State
Machine Approach: A Tutorial,” ACM Computing Surveys, volume 22, number 4,
pages 299–319, December 1990.
[61] Alexander Thomson, Thaddeus Diamond, Shu-Chun Weng, et al.: “Calvin: Fast
Distributed Transactions for Partitioned Database Systems,” at ACM International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), May 2012.
[62] Mahesh Balakrishnan, Dahlia Malkhi, Ted Wobber, et al.: “Tango: Distributed
Data Structures over a Shared Log,” at 24th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (SOSP), November 2013. doi:10.1145/2517349.2522732
[63] Robbert van Renesse and Fred B. Schneider: “Chain Replication for Supporting
High Throughput and Availability,” at 6th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), December 2004.
[64] Leslie Lamport: “How to Make a Multiprocessor Computer That Correctly Exe‐
cutes Multiprocess Programs,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, volume 28, number
9, pages 690–691, September 1979. doi:10.1109/TC.1979.1675439
[65] Enis Söztutar, Devaraj Das, and Carter Shanklin: “Apache HBase High Availabil‐
ity at the Next Level,” hortonworks.com, January 22, 2015.
[66] Brian F Cooper, Raghu Ramakrishnan, Utkarsh Srivastava, et al.: “PNUTS:
Yahoo!’s Hosted Data Serving Platform,” at 34th International Conference on Very
Large Data Bases (VLDB), August 2008. doi:10.14778/1454159.1454167
[67] Tushar Deepak Chandra and Sam Toueg: “Unreliable Failure Detectors for Reli‐
able Distributed Systems,” Journal of the ACM, volume 43, number 2, pages 225–267,
March 1996. doi:10.1145/226643.226647
[68] Michael J. Fischer, Nancy Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson: “Impossibility of Dis‐
tributed Consensus with One Faulty Process,” Journal of the ACM, volume 32, num‐
ber 2, pages 374–382, April 1985. doi:10.1145/3149.214121
380 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

[69] Michael Ben-Or: “Another Advantage of Free Choice: Completely Asynchro‐
nous Agreement Protocols,” at 2nd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
Computing (PODC), August 1983. doi:10.1145/800221.806707
[70] Jim N. Gray and Leslie Lamport: “Consensus on Transaction Commit,” ACM
Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), volume 31, number 1, pages 133–160,
March 2006. doi:10.1145/1132863.1132867
[71] Rachid Guerraoui: “Revisiting the Relationship Between Non-Blocking Atomic
Commitment and Consensus,” at 9th International Workshop on Distributed Algo‐
rithms (WDAG), September 1995. doi:10.1007/BFb0022140
[72] Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Vijay Chidambaram, Ramnatthan Ala‐
gappan, et al.: “All File Systems Are Not Created Equal: On the Complexity of Craft‐
ing Crash-Consistent Applications,” at 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2014.
[73] Jim Gray: “The Transaction Concept: Virtues and Limitations,” at 7th Interna‐
tional Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 1981.
[74] Hector Garcia-Molina and Kenneth Salem: “Sagas,” at ACM International Con‐
ference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), May 1987. doi:10.1145/38713.38742
[75] C. Mohan, Bruce G. Lindsay, and Ron Obermarck: “Transaction Management in
the R* Distributed Database Management System,” ACM Transactions on Database
Systems, volume 11, number 4, pages 378–396, December 1986. doi:
10.1145/7239.7266
[76] “Distributed Transaction Processing: The XA Specification,” X/Open Company
Ltd., Technical Standard XO/CAE/91/300, December 1991. ISBN: 978-1-872-63024-3
[77] Mike Spille: “XA Exposed, Part II,” jroller.com, April 3, 2004.
[78] Ivan Silva Neto and Francisco Reverbel: “Lessons Learned from Implementing
WS-Coordination and WS-AtomicTransaction,” at 7th IEEE/ACIS International
Conference on Computer and Information Science (ICIS), May 2008. doi:10.1109/
ICIS.2008.75
[79] James E. Johnson, David E. Langworthy, Leslie Lamport, and Friedrich H. Vogt:
“Formal Specification of a Web Services Protocol,” at 1st International Workshop on
Web Services and Formal Methods (WS-FM), February 2004. doi:10.1016/j.entcs.
2004.02.022
[80] Dale Skeen: “Nonblocking Commit Protocols,” at ACM International Conference
on Management of Data (SIGMOD), April 1981. doi:10.1145/582318.582339
[81] Gregor Hohpe: “Your Coffee Shop Doesn’t Use Two-Phase Commit,” IEEE Soft‐
ware, volume 22, number 2, pages 64–66, March 2005. doi:10.1109/MS.2005.52
Summary | 381

[82] Pat Helland: “Life Beyond Distributed Transactions: An Apostate’s Opinion,” at
3rd Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2007.
[83] Jonathan Oliver: “My Beef with MSDTC and Two-Phase Commits,” blog.jona‐
thanoliver.com, April 4, 2011.
[84] Oren Eini (Ahende Rahien): “The Fallacy of Distributed Transactions,”
ayende.com, July 17, 2014.
[85] Clemens Vasters: “Transactions in Windows Azure (with Service Bus) – An
Email Discussion,” vasters.com, July 30, 2012.
[86] “Understanding Transactionality in Azure,” NServiceBus Documentation, Par‐
ticular Software, 2015.
[87] Randy Wigginton, Ryan Lowe, Marcos Albe, and Fernando Ipar: “Distributed
Transactions in MySQL,” at MySQL Conference and Expo, April 2013.
[88] Mike Spille: “XA Exposed, Part I,” jroller.com, April 3, 2004.
[89] Ajmer Dhariwal: “Orphaned MSDTC Transactions (-2 spids),” eraofdata.com,
December 12, 2008.
[90] Paul Randal: “Real World Story of DBCC PAGE Saving the Day,” sqlskills.com,
June 19, 2013.
[91] “in-doubt xact resolution Server Configuration Option,” SQL Server 2016 docu‐
mentation, Microsoft, Inc., 2016.
[92] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer: “Consensus in the Pres‐
ence of Partial Synchrony,” Journal of the ACM, volume 35, number 2, pages 288–
323, April 1988. doi:10.1145/42282.42283
[93] Miguel Castro and Barbara H. Liskov: “Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance and
Proactive Recovery,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, volume 20, number 4,
pages 396–461, November 2002. doi:10.1145/571637.571640
[94] Brian M. Oki and Barbara H. Liskov: “Viewstamped Replication: A New Primary
Copy Method to Support Highly-Available Distributed Systems,” at 7th ACM Sympo‐
sium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), August 1988. doi:
10.1145/62546.62549
[95] Barbara H. Liskov and James Cowling: “Viewstamped Replication Revisited,”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Tech Report MIT-CSAIL-TR-2012-021, July
2012.
[96] Leslie Lamport: “The Part-Time Parliament,” ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems, volume 16, number 2, pages 133–169, May 1998. doi:10.1145/279227.279229
382 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

[97] Leslie Lamport: “Paxos Made Simple,” ACM SIGACT News, volume 32, number
4, pages 51–58, December 2001.
[98] Tushar Deepak Chandra, Robert Griesemer, and Joshua Redstone: “Paxos Made
Live – An Engineering Perspective,” at 26th ACM Symposium on Principles of Dis‐
tributed Computing (PODC), June 2007.
[99] Robbert van Renesse: “Paxos Made Moderately Complex,” cs.cornell.edu, March
2011.
[100] Diego Ongaro: “Consensus: Bridging Theory and Practice,” PhD Thesis, Stan‐
ford University, August 2014.
[101] Heidi Howard, Malte Schwarzkopf, Anil Madhavapeddy, and Jon Crowcroft:
“Raft Refloated: Do We Have Consensus?,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review,
volume 49, number 1, pages 12–21, January 2015. doi:10.1145/2723872.2723876
[102] André Medeiros: “ZooKeeper’s Atomic Broadcast Protocol: Theory and Prac‐
tice,” Aalto University School of Science, March 20, 2012.
[103] Robbert van Renesse, Nicolas Schiper, and Fred B. Schneider: “Vive La Différ‐
ence: Paxos vs. Viewstamped Replication vs. Zab,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable
and Secure Computing, volume 12, number 4, pages 472–484, September 2014. doi:
10.1109/TDSC.2014.2355848
[104] Will Portnoy: “Lessons Learned from Implementing Paxos,” blog.willport‐
noy.com, June 14, 2012.
[105] Heidi Howard, Dahlia Malkhi, and Alexander Spiegelman: “Flexible Paxos:
Quorum Intersection Revisited,” arXiv:1608.06696, August 24, 2016.
[106] Heidi Howard and Jon Crowcroft: “Coracle: Evaluating Consensus at the Inter‐
net Edge,” at Annual Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Commu‐
nication (SIGCOMM), August 2015. doi:10.1145/2829988.2790010
[107] Kyle Kingsbury: “Call Me Maybe: Elasticsearch 1.5.0,” aphyr.com, April 27,
2015.
[108] Ivan Kelly: “BookKeeper Tutorial,” github.com, October 2014.
[109] Camille Fournier: “Consensus Systems for the Skeptical Architect,” at Craft
Conference, Budapest, Hungary, April 2015.
[110] Kenneth P. Birman: “A History of the Virtual Synchrony Replication Model,”
in Replication: Theory and Practice, Springer LNCS volume 5959, chapter 6, pages
91–120, 2010. ISBN: 978-3-642-11293-5, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-11294-2_6
Summary | 383

